Portfolio of Solving Strategies in CEGAR-based
Object Packing and Scheduling for Sequential 3D Printing
Pavel Surynek1
AbstractŌĆö Computing power that used to be available only
in supercomputers decades ago especially their parallelism is
currently available in standard personal computer CPUs even
in CPUs for mobile telephones. We show how to effectively
utilize the computing power of modern multi-core personal
computer CPU to solve the complex combinatorial problem of
object arrangement and scheduling for sequential 3D printing.
We achieved this by parallelizing the existing CEGAR-SEQ
algorithm that solves the sequential object arrangement and
scheduling by expressing it as a linear arithmetic formula
which is then solved by a technique inspired by counterexample
guided abstraction refinement (CEGAR). The original CEGAR-
SEQ algorithm uses an object arrangement strategy that places
objects towards the center of the printing plate. We propose
alternative object arrangement strategies such as placing ob-
jects towards a corner of the printing plate and scheduling
objects according to their height. Our parallelization is done at
the high-level where we execute the CEGAR-SEQ algorithm in
parallel with a portfolio of object arrangement strategies, an
algorithm is called Porfolio-CEGAR-SEQ. Our experimental
evaluation indicates that Porfolio-CEGAR-SEQ outperforms
the original CEGAR-SEQ. When a batch of objects for multiple
printing plates is scheduled, Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ often uses
fewer printing plates than CEGAR-SEQ.
Keywords: 3D printing, FDM 3D printing, Cartesian 3D
printer, sequential printing, collision avoidance, rectangle pack-
ing, object packing, 3D packing, portfolio solver, object arrange-
ment strategies, strategy portfolio
I. INTRODUCTION
Additive manufacturing, i.e. 3D printing, is an increasingly
important alternative to traditional manufacturing processes.
At the same time, 3D printing, due to its nature, is very close
to robotics and to the techniques of artificial intelligence and
combinatorial optimization that are used in robotics, since the
3D printer itself can be viewed as a special robot [1].
A standard Cartesian fused deposition modeling (FDM)
3D printer creates objects on a rectangular printing plate
(usually heated) by gradually drawing individual slices of
printed objects, where these slices are very thin, approxi-
mately tenths of a millimeter. Printing is performed using a
print head with an extruder, which applies material through
a narrow nozzle. The movement of the print head is ensured
by a printer mechanism that allows the head to move in all
x, y, and z coordinates.
One of the important tasks of combinatorial optimization
in 3D printing is the arrangement of printed objects on the
printing plate so that the space of the place is used effectively
[2]ŌĆō[4].
1
Faculty
of
Information
Technology,
Czech
Technical
University
in
Prague,
Th┬┤akurova
9,
160
00
Praha
6,
Czechia
pavel.surynek@fit.cvut.cz
In this work, we deal with the recently introduced task of
sequential 3D printing [6], [7], where not print all objects
are printed slice-by-slice at once, but individual objects are
completed one after other, while individual objects still being
printed in the standard slice-by-slice manner. As noted in [6],
sequential printing is particularly challenging because the ob-
jects need to be arranged on the printing plate in such a way
that the print head and other mechanical parts, such as the
gantry on which the print head is mounted, avoid previously
printed objects (see Figure 1 for illustrations). Moreover,
sequential printing does not only mean spatial arrangement
of objects on a printing plate, but also determining the order
in which the objects are printed.
Specifically, we address computational difficulty of the
sequential printing problem by utilizing parallelism of mod-
ern CPUs. The previous work, namely the CEGAR-SEQ
algorithm [6], translates the problem of sequential printing to
a linear arithmetic formula that is subsequently solved by an
off-the-shelf solver. This approach has a significant limitation
that the solver runs in non-parallel mode and therefore does
not fully utilize modern multi-core CPUs. Moreover, low-
level parallelization at the level of fine grained operations of
the solving algorithm based on search usually does not help
much due to its exponential complexity.
Our approach is different, we identify parameters of the
original CEGAR-SEQ algorithm that has a significant impact
on its answer. Then we run CEGAR-SEQ with different
settings of the parameters in parallel and eventually choose
the best answer. We call the different setting of the param-
eters a portfolio and the resulting algorithmic framework
is called Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ. The parameters we use to
build the portfolio are in fact various heuristic strategies such
as specific preference for placement of objects on the printing
plate (the original CEGAR-SEQ optimizes placement of
objects towards the center of the printing plate) or the
ordering that determines selection of objects for a given
printing plate in the case of sequential object scheduling for
multiple printing plates.
Sequential printing has far-reaching significance for mod-
ern 3D printing, it can help to tackle the following chal-
lenges:
(i) increasing the robustness of the printing process to
errors (in case of failure, we do not have to repeat the
entire print, but only the unfinished objects)
(ii) elimination of difficulties caused by frequent move-
ments of the print head between objects (such as string-
ing etc., can also help in increasing the printing speed)
(iii) minimize the number of time consuming color changes
arXiv:2603.12224v1  [cs.AI]  12 Mar 2026
Fig. 1: Standard 3D printing slice by slice and sequential 3D printing where objects are completed one by one shown in
Prusa Slicer [5]. The ordering of objects for sequential printing is shown by numbers. Printer extruder and gantry must
avoid previously printed objects in the sequential case (printing of the last object is shown). The sequential arrangement and
schedule has been obtained by the CEGAR-SEQ algorithm [6].
during multi-color printing, where a classic example is
printing each object in a different color.
A. Related Work
Abstract versions of the problem of object arrangement
on a printing plate have been studied in literature and is
known as object packing or object stacking [4]. Search-based
algorithms have been developed for the related problem
of rectangle packing [8], [9]. As shown in [10], rectangle
packing is NP-hard, which means that object arrangement
and scheduling for sequential printing is also NP-hard, since
it is a more general problem.
Genetic optimization has been used for packing 3D objects
[11]. Various special algorithms have also been developed for
box packing [12] or algorithms for placing smaller objects in
concave parts of other objects [13]. The most relevant to us
are works that translate problems, whether rectangle packing
or 3D packing, into other formalisms, such as those for
constraint programming (CSP) [14], linear programming LP
[15], or satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) [16] for which
an off-the-shelf efficient solvers exist. Rectangle packing
using CSP is described in [17], [18] and the application of
SMT for the same problem is shown in [19].
B. Contribution
We build on top of the previous formalization of the object
arranging and scheduling problem for sequential printing as
suggested in [6], [7], where the problem is denoted SEQ-
PACK+S. We explicitly parametrize the previous CEGAR-
SEQ with object arrangement and object ordering strategies
that we call a composite strategy - the resulting framework is
called Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ. We also suggest several ob-
ject orderings and arrangement strategies that are combined
together (similarly as a Cartesian product) to form up to 20
composite strategies, a rich portfolio but still manageable by
a contemporary CPU. Parallel processing of the portfolio on
modern CPUs does not add any significant runtime increase
but often leads to better solutions in multiple printing plate
setting than the original CEGAR-SEQ. Often Portfolio-
CEGAR-SEQ is able to sequentially arrange and schedule
a large batch of objects on fewer printing plates as shown in
our experiments that represents a significant advantage for a
printer operator.
II. BACKGROUND
The problem of 3D sequential object arrangement and
scheduling (inspired by the terminology for rectangle pack-
aging, we will rather call the problem ŌĆ£object packing
and schedulingŌĆØ and denote SEQ-PACK+S) is a task of
determining the positions and order of 3D objects so that the
objects can be printed by the 3D printer in a determined order
at the determined positions sequentially, one after the other.
Unlike standard 3D printing, where all objects are printed
at once in individual slices, in sequential printing, objects
are completed individually. That is, when the next object is
printed, the previously printed objects are still present on
the printing plate. It is therefore necessary to ensure that the
print head and other mechanical parts of the 3D printer do
not collide with previously printed objects when printing the
next object.
While determining the printing order of objects to print is
a discrete problem, determining object positions is inherently
a continuous problem, which presents specific challenges.
Let R3 be a three dimensional Euclidean space, a finite
set of objects O = {O1, O2, ..., Ok}, where each object Oi
is a connected set {(xi, yi, zi) ŌłłOi} ŌŖåR3, in addition to
this, there is an extruder object E, {(xe, ye, ze) ŌłłE} ŌŖå
R3 that represents a moving part of the printer that prints
objects. On a real Cartesian 3D printer, the extruder object
is represented by the extruder, print head, gantry, cables,
and other moving parts. All objects including the extruder
are expressed in the same coordinate system. We assume
that the extruder does not change shape during its motion.
For simplicity, we abstract from bending of cables in this
mathematical model. However, the model can be further
generalized to take this into account. Moving extruder E
means to translate E to some position (xt, yt, zt) ŌłłR3 at
time t ŌłłR. Hence extruder appears as a translated object
{(xe + xt, ye + yt, ze + zt) | (xe, ye, ze) ŌłłE}} at time t.
We can assume that (xt, yt, zt) changes smoothly as with
real 3D printers happens but it is not important for further
definitions.
We can mathematically model the plate as a subset of
a plane perpendicular to the z-axis. Typically, the plate is
rectangular, sometimes circular, exceptionally of a different
shape. Mathematically, the plate will be a subset of 2D plane,
PP ŌŖåR2. The extruder moves above the plate using printer
mechanics. Any point relatively above the printing plate PP
up to certain height is accessible by the extruder which
together defines a printing volume V ŌŖåR3.
For simplicity, we will assume that all objects to be
printed will fit into the printing volume V, and we will also
assume that the extruder can move slightly above the printing
volume, which eliminates the need to worry about the height
of objects in further definitions.
Common 3D printer mechanics such as Cartesian (bed-
slinger) or CoreXY are covered by our definitions.
From the mathematical point of view, we can look at
printing an object in such a way that it is necessary to create
every point of the printed object, that is, to touch every point
of the printed object with the extruder, or more precisely,
with a selected point of the extruder, in our case the point
(0,0,0) of the extruder. The point (0,0,0) of the extruder will
correspond to the nozzle opening.
The extruder must therefore move to each point of the
printed object. Once a point is printed, we must take into
account its presence for future movements of the extruder,
that is, the extruder must not collide with the point in the
future. Mathematically, the printed point must never appear
inside the translated extruder.
In standard printing, we assume that we place objects
on the plate and print them according to the increasing z-
coordinate in slices. Assuming that the z-coordinates of the
extruder are non-negative except for the point (0,0,0) (which
also corresponds to a real 3D printer), there is no risk of
collision with any already printed part. However, this is
no longer case in sequential 3D printing, when individual
objects are completed one after other.
In the case of sequential printing, we want to determine
the positions of the objects and their temporal ordering,
so that when printing objects sequentially in this specified
order, there is never a collision between the extruder and
a previously printed object. We will call this requirement
a sequential non-colliding requirement. Next, we need to
ensure that all objects are placed on the printing plate, we
will call this requirement the printing plate requirement (no
part of an object extends beyond the printing plate) 1. And
finally, we need to ensure that the extruder can be lifted
vertically up and moved to print the next object, i.e. the
extruder can be lowered back to the printing plate for printing
the next object. We can simplify the last requirement slightly
by requiring the extruder to be able to move freely vertically
upwards from any top point of the object being printed.
This allows both for initial accessing the volume for printing
the object as well as leaving the object volume. We will
call this requirement an extruder traversability requirement.
Other variations of this requirement are also possible, and
the method we developed is general enough to work with
such generalizations.
Formally, we need to determine for each object Oi ŌłłO
1Equivalently, the printing plate requirement can be expressed by the
requirement that all objects are placed within the printing volume V . The
way of expression we have chosen corresponds better with the proposed
solution technique.
its position on the plate (Xi, Yi, Zi) ŌłłR3 (Zi is deter-
mined by placing object vertically on the surface of the
plate) and the order of the objects, i.e. the permutation
ŽĆ : {1, 2, ..., k} ŌåÆ{1, 2, ..., k}, such that the sequential non-
colliding requirement, the printing plate requirement hold,
and extruder traversability hold.
We introduce object transforming functions: P : 2R3 ŌåÆ
2R3, a function that places object onto the plate, E : 2R3 ŌåÆ
2R3, a function that makes an extruder envelope of a given
object. In addition to this, let ()xy : 2R3 ŌåÆ2R2 be a
projection of the given object onto the printing plate, and
()ŌŖż: 2R3 ŌåÆ2R3 be an extended top of the printed object
defined as follows:
ŌĆó P(Oi) = {(xi + Xi, yi + Yi, zi + Zi) |
(xi, yi, zi) ŌłłOi}
ŌĆó E(Oi) = {(xi + xe, yi + ye, zi + ze) |
(xi, yi, zi) ŌłłOi Ōł¦(xe, ye, ze) ŌłłE}
ŌĆó Oxy
i
= {(x, y) | (x, y, z) ŌłłOi}
ŌĆó Oi
ŌŖż= {(x, y, z) | z Ōēźmaxz Ōł¦(x, y, maxz) ŌłłOi}
where maxz = max{z | (x, y, z) ŌłłOi}
Let us note that E(P(Oi)) and E(Oi) are equivalent to the
Minkowski sum of P(Oi) and the extruder E and Oi and
the extruder E respectively.
The sequential non-colliding requirement can be ex-
pressed as follows:
(ŌłĆi, j = 1, 2, ..., k)(ŽĆ(i) < ŽĆ(j) ŌćÆP(Oi) Ōł®E(P(Oj)) = Ōłģ)
(1)
Placement objects within the printing plate, i.e. the print-
ing plate requirement can be expressed as follows:
(ŌłĆi = 1, 2, ..., k)(P(Oi)xy ŌŖåPP )
(2)
The extruder traversability requirement can be expressed
as follows:
(ŌłĆi, j = 1, 2, ..., k)(ŽĆ(i) < ŽĆ(j) ŌćÆP(Oi) Ōł®P(Oj)ŌŖż= Ōłģ)
(3)
Optimality in SEQ-PACK+S. The problem of object
packing for sequential printing is a decision problem in its
basic variant. Various notions of optimality in SEQ-PACK+S
can be adopted.
The printing plate of a real 3D printer is usually heated
to achieve adhesion of objects to the plate, with the most
uniform heating towards the center of the plate, while
irregularities in heating increase towards the edges of the
plate. Given these physical properties, it is advantageous to
place printed objects towards the center of the printing plate.
This preference has been taken into account in the design
of the objective in the original CEGAR-SEQ algorithm. Let
CP ŌłłR2 be a center of PP .
Intuitively, we will try to shrink PP around CP so that
placement of object satisfying the sequential printability
requirements is still possible. Formally, let CP = (xc, yc)
and ŽāPP = {(xc+Žā(xŌłÆxc), yc+Žā(yŌłÆyc)) | (x, y) ŌłłPP }.
The printing plate requirement can be modified accordingly:
(ŌłĆi = 1, 2, ..., k)(P(Oi)xy ŌŖåŽāPP )
(4)
We will define the optimization variant of SEQ-PACK+S
as finding Žā Ōłł(0, 1] that is as small as possible and
requirements 1, 3, and 4 are satisfied.
III. A LINEAR ARITHMETIC MODEL
Let Xi, Yi ŌłłR be decision variables determining the
position of object Oi and let Ti ŌłłR be decision variables de-
termining the time at which respective objects Oi are printed.
Ti variables will be used to determine the permutation ŽĆ of
objects for sequential printing.
A linear arithmetic formula that expresses the SEQ-
PACK+S problem over Xi, Yi and Ti is constructed. For sim-
plicity we recall here only important blocks of constraints,
for details of the formula we refer the reader to [6].
Let
PA
=
(A1, A2, ...A╬▒)
ŌŖå
R2
and
PB
=
(B1, B2, ..., B╬▓) ŌŖåR2 are two polygons. A constraint
Points-outside-Polygon or PoP(XA, YA, PA, XB, YB, PB)
requires that vertices of PA placed at position XA, YA are
outside of PB placed at position XA, XB. This constraint is
relatively easy to express, however is not sufficient to express
the requirement that polygons do not overlap.
To
ensure
non-overlapping
between
polygons
a
Lines-not-Intersect
or
LnI (XA, YA, Ai, A(i mod k)+1,
XB, YB, Bj, B(j mod l)+1)
constraint
is
needed.
The
constraint ensures that the i-th edge of polygon A placed
at position XA, YA does not intersect with the j-th edge of
polygon B placed at position XB, YB. Since this constraint
is harder to express, the CEGAR-SEQ algorithm does not
add these constraints from the beginning. These constraints
are rather treated in the counterexample guided abstraction
refinement style (CEGAR) [20], [21]. Briefly said, the LnI
constraint is added only after if it is violated. As shown
in [6] the CEGAR-style constraint refinement is a key to
efficiency of the CEGAR-SEQ algorithm.
For expressing the requirement that a polygon lies in-
side the printing plate a constraint Polygon-inside-Polygon
or PiP(XA, YA, PA, XB, YB, PB) is used. The constraint
expresses that vertices of PA placed at position XA, YA are
inside PB placed at position XB, YB.
The CEGAR-SEQ algorithm for solving an instance of
the approximation of SEQ-PACK+S as a linear arithmetic
formula by a CEGAR-inspired approach is shown using
pseudo-code as Algorithm 1. The pseudo-code shows a
variant of the algorithm that is parametrized by a composite
strategy. Let us briefly recall that the algorithm introduces
the constraints into a formula F that is subsequently solved
by an SMT solver. For details on the CEGAR-SEQ algorithm
we refer the reader to [6].
IV. A PORTFOLIO OF SCHEDULING STRATEGIES
The original CEGAR-SEQ algorithm uses an object ar-
rangement strategy that places objects towards the center
of the printing plate. This is justified by the fact that
heat distribution over the printing plate is more regular
towards its center (see Figure 2 - left). However modern
3D printers are often enclosed and advancements in the
design of heated beds eliminate irregularities in the heat
distribution. Therefore it starts to be worthwhile to consider
different object arrangement and scheduling strategies such
as arranging objects towards a corner of the printing plate
(see Figure 2 - right).
In addition to object arrangement strategies it may be
beneficial to consider various object orderings in the con-
text of sequential arranging and scheduling objects across
multiple printing plates. Object ordering determines which
objects will be arranged and scheduled for the first plate,
which objects will go to the second plate, etc. More precisely,
given object ordering, the algorithm will try to arrange and
schedule the first k objects according to the ordering for the
first printing plate where k is as large as possible.
We denote spatial object arrangement strategy on plate as
tactic and object ordering simply as ordering. A composite
strategy denoted as STRATEGY for short consists of:
ŌĆó an object arrangement strategy, that is a tactic, denoted
STRATEGY .Tactic and
ŌĆó an object ordering, denoted STRATEGY .Ordering.
The original CEGAR-SEQ algorithm has been modified
so that it takes the composite strategy STRATEGY as its
input. The modified CEGAR-SEQ combines a tactic and an
ordering from the given composite strategy for selection of
objects for arrangement on the plate and for the way in which
objects are arranged on the plate.
The following tactics are used to compose composite
strategies, the set denoted Tactics:
ŌĆó Center - objects are arranged towards the center of the
plate (see Figure 2 - left)
ŌĆó Max-X-Min-Y - object are arranged towards the max-
imum x and the minimum y coordinates of the plate
(see Figure 2 - right)
ŌĆó Min-X-Max-Y, Min-X-Min-Y, and Max-X-Max-Y -
with analogous meaning
The abstract model of a given tactic is carried out via
a function STRATEGY .Tactic(Žā, PP ) that for a given
Žā Ōłł(0, 1] and a printing plate PP returns the printing plate
scaled down by a factor of Žā while the resulting printing
plate denoted ŽāPP is shaped according to the given tactic
(towards the center or towards a corner, etc.).
The
abstract
model
of
an
ordering
is
for
simplicity carried out by a non-deterministic function
STRATEGY .Ordering(O) that for a given (finite) set of
objects O returns a subset of objects {O1, O2, ..., Ok} ŌŖåO
that fits with respect to sequential printing onto the plate,
moreover k is as large as possible, that is, the next object
Ok+1 with respect to the ordering does not fit on the
plate (objects {O1, O2, ..., Ok+1} cannot be arranged and
scheduled sequentially on the plate). The abovementioned
non-determinism allows for easy guessing of k 2.
Suggested object orderings is based on expert knowledge
that the height of the object is a decisive property for
sequential printing. Therefore suggested object orderings
2Without the help of non-determinism we would have to add another
optimization loop to the algorithm for finding optimal k which would make
the algorithmsŌĆÖ pseudo-code too complicated.
Algorithm 1: CEGAR-SEQ [6] parameterized by
a composite strategy: sequential object packing by
a CEGAR-based algorithm where a given strategy
determines object ordering and object arrangement
tactic.
1 Solve-CEGAR-SEQ(PP , O, STRATEGY )
2
Decision ŌåÉ[]
3
while O ╠Ė= Ōłģdo
4
{O1, O2, ..., Ok} ŌåÉSTRATEGY .Ordering(O)
5
(X1, Y1, T1), ..., (Xk, Yk, Tk)) ŌåÉ
((ŌŖź, ŌŖź, ŌŖź), ..., (ŌŖź, ŌŖź, ŌŖź))
6
F ŌåÉ[]
7
for each i, j Ōłł{1, 2, ..., k} Ōł¦i ╠Ė= j do
8
F ŌåÉF Ōł¬{Ti + ŽĄT < Tj Ōł©Tj + ŽĄT < Ti}
9
F ŌåÉF Ōł¬{Ti < Tj ŌćÆ
(PoP(Xi, Yi, C(Oxy
i ), Xj, Yj, C(E(Oj)xy)) Ōł¦
PoP(Xj, Yj, C(E(Oj)xy), Xi, Yi, C(Oxy
i )))}
10
Žā0 ŌåÉ0
11
Žā+ ŌåÉ1
12
while Žā+ ŌłÆŽā0 > ŽĄXY do
13
Žā ŌåÉ(Žā+ + Žā0)/2
14
ŽāPP ŌåÉSTRATEGY .Tactic(PP , Žā)
15
answer ŌåÉSolve-CEGAR-SEQ-Bounded
(F, ŽāPP , {O1, O2, ..., Ok})
16
if answer ╠Ė= UNSAT then
17
let (((X1, Y1, T1), ...,
18
(Xk, Yk, Tk)), F) = answer
19
Žā+ ŌåÉŽā
20
else
21
Žā0 ŌåÉŽā
22
O ŌåÉO \ {O1, O2, ..., Ok}
23
Decision ŌåÉDecision.((X1, Y1), ..., (Xk, Yk))
24
return Decision
25 Solve-CEGAR-SEQ-Bounded(F, ŽāPP , {O1, O2, ..., Ok})
26
╬” ŌåÉ[]
27
for each i Ōłł{1, 2, ..., k} do
28
╬” ŌåÉ╬” Ōł¬{PiP(Xi, Yi, C(Oxy
i ), 0, 0, ŽāPP )}
29
while TRUE do
30
answer ŌåÉSolve-SMT(F, ╬”)
31
if answer ╠Ė= UNSAT then
32
let ((X1, Y1, T1), ..., (Xk, Yk, Tk)) = answer
33
for each i, j Ōłł{1, 2, ..., k} Ōł¦i ╠Ė= j do
34
let (A1, A2, ..., A╬▒) = C(Oxy
i )
35
let (B1, B2, ..., B╬▓) = E(C(Oxy
j ))
36
refined ŌåÉFALSE
37
for each a Ōłł{1, 2, ..., ╬▒} do
38
for each b Ōłł{1, 2, ..., ╬▓} do
39
if Ti < TjŌł¦
Lines-Intersect(Xi, Yi, Aa,
40
A(a mod ╬▒)+1, Xj, Yj, Bb, B(b mod ╬▓)+1)
then
41
F ŌåÉF Ōł¬{Ti < Tj ŌćÆ
LnI (Xi, Yi, Aa, A(a mod ╬▒)+1,
42
Xj, Yj, Bb, B(b mod ╬▓)+1)}
43
refined ŌåÉTRUE
44
if ┬¼refined then
45
return
(((X1, Y1, T1), ..., (Xk, Yk, Tk)), F)
46
else
47
return UNSAT
sorts objects according to their height. The following object
orderings are used to compose composite strategies, the set
Algorithm 2: Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ: A portfolio-
based high level extension of the CEGAR-SEQ algo-
rithm - object ordering and arrangement tactics are
combined. For loops at line 7 and 8 are expected to
be implemented in parallel.
1 Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ(PP , O)
2
Orderings ŌåÉ{Height-Min-to-Max,
3
Height-Max-to-Min, Height-Random}
4
Tactics ŌåÉ{Center, Min-X -Min-Y , Max-X -Min-Y ,
5
Min-X -Max-Y , Max-X -Max-Y }
6
Answers ŌåÉŌłģ
7
for ordering ŌłłOrderings do
8
for tactic ŌłłTactics do
9
STRATEGY .OrderingŌåÉordering
10
STRATEGY .TacticŌåÉtactic
11
answer ŌåÉ
Solve-CEGAR-SEQ(PP , O, STRATEGY )
12
Answers ŌåÉAnswers Ōł¬{answer}
13
best-answer ŌåÉSelect-Best-Schedule(Answers)
14
return best-answer
denoted Orderings:
ŌĆó Height-Min-to-Max - objects are ordered according to
their height from the shortest one to the tallest one
ŌĆó Height-Max-to-Min - objects are ordered according to
their height from the tallest one to the shortest one
ŌĆó Height-Random - objects are ordered randomly
ŌĆó Height-Input - objects are taken in the same order as
they come in the input
Altogether the basic portfolio of the for the modified
CEGAR-SEQ algorithm consists of |Tactics ├Ś Orderings|
composite strategies.
3. The pseudo-code of Portfolio-
CEGAR-SEQ is shown as Algorithm 2.
PP 
ŽāPP 
PP 
ŽāPP 
Fig. 2: Object arrangement strategies (tactics): (i) objects are
placed towards the center of the printing plate PP (Center
tactic), (ii) objects are placed towards the maximum x and
minimum y coordinates w.r.t. PP (Max-X-Min-Y tactic).
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
CEGAR-SEQ [6] has been written in C++ and integrated
as part of Prusa Slicer 2.9.1 [5], an open-source slicing
software for 3D printers. Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ has been
written in C++ as well but currently it is not integrated within
the publicly available slicing software.
Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ shares with the previous CEGAR-
SEQ the internal usage of the Z3 Theorem Prover [22],
3Concretely it is 5 ├Ś 4 = 20 which is adequate for parallel processing
by a multi-core CPU of a contemporary personal computer.
 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
Success rate
Number of objects
Success rate | rnd. boxes | 200x200
Gecode
Z3
 
0,001
0,01
0,1
1
10
100
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
Runtime (seconds)
Instance
Sorted runtimes | rnd. boxes | 200x200
Gecode
Z3
Fig. 3: Comparison of solving SEQ-PACK+S by the Gecode solver and the z3 solver on random cuboids on a 200mm ├Ś
200mm plate. The right part shows cactus plots of runtimes (lower plot is better).
 
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
2400
2800
3200
3600
4000
4400
4800
5200
5600
6000
Runtime (seconds)
Instance
Sorted runtimes|printer parts|250x210
Tactic
Ordering
Combined
Center
Fig. 4: Sorted runtimes of Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ with var-
ious portfolios on printer parts.
an SMT solver, that has been used for solving the linear
arithmetic model. We have performed extensive testing of
both the CEGAR-SEQ algorithm and Portfolio-CEGAR-
SEQ and present some of the results in this section. All
experiments were performed on a system with CPU AMD
Ryzen 7 2700 3.2GHz, 32GB RAM, running Kubuntu Linux
24.
All
source
code
and
experimental
data
presented
in
this
paper
are
available
in
github.com/{double-blind}/cegar-seq
repository to support reproducibility of results.
A. Comparison of Underlying Solvers
Since there is currently no comparable other comparable
solver for sequential printing other than CEGAR-SEQ and
Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ, we decided to conduct a competitive
comparison at least at the solver level.
We compared solving of the SEQ-PACK+S problem with
the Z3 solver and with the Gecode solver [23], which is a
CSP solver. Hence we compared solving SEQ-PACK+S in
two different paradigms, SMT and CSP.
The experimental setup consisted of a printing plate of size
200 ├Ś 200 4 and random cuboids whose length, width and
4Sizes can be assumed in mm that corresponds to a real 3D printer.
height were integer and chosen randomly from a uniform
distribution in the interval [8,64], the number of cuboids
ranges from 1 to 32. For each number of cuboids, 100
random instances were generated. The timeout was set to
one minute. This experiment reproduces the experiment from
[6] but adds more measurements per data point (100 vs. 10
in the original experiment) and provides greater timeout (60
seconds vs. 8 seconds in the original experiment).
The solvers in this test were set to an optimal mode which
means that all objects were scheduled at once into a as small
as possible rectangle placed around the center of the printing
plate.
Results are shown in Figure 3 which shows a clear dom-
inance of the SMT paradigm represented by the Z3 solver.
Additionally, we note that the linear arithmetic formula
uses variables with a rational domain in contrast to finite
domain of Gecode with millimeter resolution, so the resulting
solution from the Z3 solver is more accurate.
In the optimal mode, there is a certain limit for the number
of objects the solvers are able to solve within the given
timeout of 60 seconds. Results indicate that scheduling more
than 25 cuboids is virtually unsolvable for the Gecode solver;
this limit is approximately 30 cuboids for the Z3 solver.
We also performed runtime comparison between various
variants of the Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ solver and the original
CEGAR-SEQ. We used 4 setups of composite strategies:
ŌĆó Center - corresponds to the original CEGAR-SEQ
with a single Center tactic combined with Height-Input
object ordering
ŌĆó Ordering - consists of four object orderings Height-
Min-to-Max, Height-Max-to-Min, Height-Random, and
Height-Input combined with the Center tactic
ŌĆó Tactic - consists of five tactics Center, Min-X-Min-
Y, Max-X-Min-Y, Min-X-Max-Y, and Max-X-Max-Y
cobined with Height-Input object ordering
ŌĆó Combined - consists of all object orderings and tactics
from previous two composite strategies that altogether
form 20 composite strategies
This experiment has a different setup. As a testing case we
use sequential 3D printing of complex objects - 3D printable
 
1
2
3
0
2
4
6
8
Avearte number of plates
Number of objects
Average number of plates
printer parts | 250 x 210
Center
Ordering
Tactic
Combined
 
0
4
8
12
16
20
0
4
8
12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52
Avearte number of plates
Number of objects
Average number of plates
printer parts | 250 x 210
Center
Ordering
Tactic
Combined
Fig. 5: Average number of printing plates used by a sub-optimal variant of Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ under four different
portfolios of composite strategies.
parts for a 3D printer 5, the benchmark consists of 34 diverse
objects. Similar setup has been used in [6].
We tried to solve SEQ-PACK+S for the increasing number
of objects ranging from 1 up to 64. For each number of
objects we selected random objects from the benchmark
set (objects can be repeated), 100 instances per number of
objects were solved.
Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ has been set to a sub-optimal
mode in this experiment. This is achieved through the
STRATEGY .Ordering that returns at most k objects that
are arranged and scheduled with respect to previously ar-
ranged and scheduled objects. Each time given k objects are
scheduled optimally. Since objects are scheduled in groups
of k the algorithm cannot reach global optimum, but the
advantage is that it is much faster. Parameter k was set
to 4 in this experiment. In addition to this, solving takes
place across multiple printing plates - if objects do not fit
onto a plate then remaining objects are scheduled on a fresh
printing plate. STRATEGY .Ordering is assumed to non-
deterministically guess and return the remaining number of
objects for the plate if it less than k.
Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ in the sub-optimal mode cannot
normally fail to arrange and schedule even many objects as
it can use multiple printing plates if needed while only a
bounded number of objects is arranged and scheduled on
a single plate. Runtime results are shown in Figure 4. The
algorithm has been run in parallel for all composite strategies
in a given setup and finished after object arranging and
scheduling has been finished for all the composite strategies
(the best solution is eventually returned).
Results clearly indicate that adding more composite strate-
gies increases wall-clock runtime up to multiple times.
However, even for 20 composite strategies the increase factor
in wall-clock runtime is acceptable.
B. Benefit of Portfolio
The main benefit of portfolio-based solver for sequential
printing is to produce better solutions in the sub-optimal
5The benchmark consists of 3D printable parts for the Original Prusa
MK3S printer.
 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Ratio per plate
Histogram | Objects per plate
Central
Ordering
Tactic
Combined
Fig. 6: Histogram of the number of plates used by a sub-
optimal variant of Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ under four differ-
ent portfolios of composite strategies.
setting. The quality of solutions can be measured by the
number of printing plates being used. For example fitting
objects onto 1 plate instead of 2 represents a significant
practical difference for the operator of the printer.
To evaluate the benefit of using Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ,
we measured the number of printing plates used for arrang-
ing and scheduling by the previous CEGAR-SEQ and and
the new Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ in their sub-optimal setup
(groups of objects of size 4 are scheduled at once). Results
are shown in Figure 5. For a small number of objects, the
richer the portfolio is, the fewer number of plates are being
used. A printing plate is often saved, which for a small batch
of objects to print represents a significant difference. The
best results can be achieved by the Combined portfolio.
The Ordering and the Tactic composite strategies exhibit an
orthogonal behavior when their synergy comes to an effect
in the Combined composite strategies. The Tactic component
brings a greater benefit according to experiments.
As the number of objects grows the benefit of the Com-
bined composite strategies is diminishing with respect to
the second best Tactic composite strategies. Nevertheless,
the benefit of Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ is still significant with
respect to the original CEGAR-SEQ - significantly fewer
Fig. 7: The benefit of portfolio-based sequential print scheduling for 30 pieces of printer parts - left: the standard parallel
printing. Middle: objects scheduled sequentially by the previous CEGAR-SEQ (7 plates used). Right: objects scheduled
sequentially by Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ (6 plates used).
printing plates are often used for scheduling.
The histogram of the number of per printing plate is shown
in Figure 6. Results indicate that more complex composite
strategies tend to place more objects onto the printing
plate. The original CEGAR-SEQ and Ordering composite
strategies tend to place k objects onto printing plate in
many cases, that is the same number of objects as returned
by STRATEGY .Ordering. The more complex composite
strategies tend to go beyond k objects per printing plate.
VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed an extension of CEGAR-SEQ [6], an existing
algorithm for sequential object arrangement and schedul-
ing, with a portfolio of object ordering and arrangement
strategies. Our new algorithm Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ runs
instances of CEGAR-SEQ with various strategies in parallel
and eventually chooses the best solution according to the
given objective found by one of the parallel instances. The
number of printing plates being used for sequential printing
of a large batch of objects turned out to be a useful objective.
Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ has been shown to generate better
solutions in terms of the number of printing plates being
used - Portfolio-CEGAR-SEQ often uses fewer printing
plates which represents a significant advantage of the printer
operator. Moreover, it turned out that object ordering and
arrangement strategies have an orthogonal effect to some
extent, that is, they can be combined to achieve a synergistic
effect as shown in our experiments.
For future work, we want to deal with the possibility
of rotating objects directly in the formal model. An open
question is also how to integrate heuristics for increasing
performance - one option seems to be initialization of the
solver with a heuristically found solution.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Gao, Y. Zhang, D. Ramanujan, K. Ramani, Y. Chen, C. B.
Williams, C. C. L. Wang, Y. C. Shin, S. Zhang, and P. D. Zavattieri,
ŌĆ£The status, challenges, and future of additive manufacturing in
engineering,ŌĆØ Comput. Aided Des., vol. 69, pp. 65ŌĆō89, 2015.
[2] S. Wu, M. Kay, R. King, A. Vila-parrish, and D. Warsing, ŌĆ£Multi-
objective optimization of 3d packing problem in additive manufac-
turing,ŌĆØ IIE Annual Conference and Expo 2014, pp. 1485ŌĆō1494, 01
2014.
[3] S. Edelkamp and P. Wichern, ŌĆ£Packing irregular-shaped objects for
3d printing,ŌĆØ in KI 2015: Advances in Artificial Intelligence - 38th
Annual German Conference on AI, Proceedings, ser. LNCS, vol. 9324.
Springer, 2015, pp. 45ŌĆō58.
[4] L. Cao, L. Tian, H. Peng, Y. Zhou, and L. Lu, ŌĆ£Constrained stacking
in DLP 3d printing,ŌĆØ Comput. Graph., vol. 95, pp. 60ŌĆō68, 2021.
[5] The Prusa Slicer Team, ŌĆ£Prusa slicer 2.9.1,ŌĆØ 2025, available from
https://github.com/prusa3d/PrusaSlicer.
[6] P. Surynek, V. Bubnik, L. Matena, and P. Kubis, ŌĆ£Object packing and
scheduling for sequential 3d printing: a linear arithmetic model and a
cegar-inspired optimal solver,ŌĆØ in IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS 2025.
IEEE, 2025, pp.
5679ŌĆō5686.
[7] ŌĆöŌĆö, ŌĆ£A linear arithmetic model reflecting vertical object details in
object packing and scheduling for sequential 3d printing,ŌĆØ in 21st IEEE
International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering,
CASE 2025.
IEEE, 2025, pp. 1094ŌĆō1100.
[8] E. Huang and R. E. Korf, ŌĆ£Optimal packing of high-precision rectan-
gles,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Symposium on Combina-
torial Search, SOCS 2011.
AAAI Press, 2011, pp. 195ŌĆō196.
[9] ŌĆöŌĆö, ŌĆ£Optimal rectangle packing: An absolute placement approach,ŌĆØ
J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 47ŌĆō87, 2013.
[10] R. E. Korf, ŌĆ£Optimal rectangle packing: Initial results,ŌĆØ in Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling (ICAPS 2003).
AAAI, 2003, pp. 287ŌĆō295.
[11] I. Ikonen, W. E. Biles, A. Kumar, J. C. Wissel, and R. K. Ragade, ŌĆ£A
genetic algorithm for packing three-dimensional non-convex objects
having cavities and holes,ŌĆØ in International Conference on Genetic
Algorithms, 1997.
[12] A. Lim and W. Ying, ŌĆ£A new method for the three dimensional
container packing problem,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the 17th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2001.
Morgan
Kaufmann, 2001, pp. 342ŌĆō350.
[13] J. Egeblad, B. K. Nielsen, and A. Odgaard, ŌĆ£Fast neighborhood search
for two- and three-dimensional nesting problems,ŌĆØ Eur. J. Oper. Res.,
vol. 183, no. 3, pp. 1249ŌĆō1266, 2007.
[14] R. Dechter, Constraint Processing. Elsevier Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[15] D. Rader, Deterministic Operations Research: Models and Methods
in Linear Optimization.
Wiley, 2010.
[16] C. W. Barrett and C. Tinelli, ŌĆ£Satisfiability modulo theories,ŌĆØ in
Handbook of Model Checking.
Springer, 2018, pp. 305ŌĆō343.
[17] M. D. Moffitt and M. E. Pollack, ŌĆ£Optimal rectangle packing: A meta-
csp approach,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS 2006.
AAAI, 2006, pp.
93ŌĆō102.
[18] R. E. Korf, M. D. Moffitt, and M. E. Pollack, ŌĆ£Optimal rectangle
packing,ŌĆØ Ann. Oper. Res., vol. 179, no. 1, pp. 261ŌĆō295, 2010.
[19] T. Nikken, ŌĆ£Satisfiability modulo theories based packing of scalable
rectangles for real-time layout generation,ŌĆØ Master Thesis, Radboud
University Nijmegen, pp. 1ŌĆō53, 2020.
[20] E.
M.
Clarke,
O.
Grumberg,
S.
Jha,
Y.
Lu,
and
H.
Veith,
ŌĆ£Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement,ŌĆØ in Computer Aided
Verification, 12th International Conference, CAV 2000, Proceedings,
ser. LNCS, vol. 1855.
Springer, 2000, pp. 154ŌĆō169.
[21] ŌĆöŌĆö, ŌĆ£Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement for symbolic
model checking,ŌĆØ J. ACM, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 752ŌĆō794, 2003.
[22] L. De Moura and N. Bj├Ėrner, ŌĆ£Z3: an efficient smt solver,ŌĆØ in
Proceedings of the Theory and Practice of Software, 14th International
Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis
of Systems.
Springer-Verlag, 2008, p. 337ŌĆō340.
[23] The Gecode Team, ŌĆ£Gecode: Generic constraint development environ-
ment,ŌĆØ 2006, available from http://www.gecode.org.
