Neural Thickets:
Diverse Task Experts Are Dense Around Pretrained Weights
Yulu Gan, Phillip Isola
MIT CSAIL
{yulu_gan, phillipi}@mit.edu
Pre-trained weights:
Per-task solution set:
Weight space
Large model
Small model
Gaussian 
search 
window
tasks
GSM8k 
expert 
(math)
ROCStories 
expert 
(writing)
MBPP expert 
(Programming)
USPTO 
expert 
(chemistry)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Post-training with RandOpt 
O(1) training and FLOP-efficient with Better Acc
Scaling Law
Figure 1: (a) Schematic of the main effects we observe (see Fig 2 for a version with real data). Left: Small models live in a needle
in a haystack regime, where good solutions to downstream tasks occupy a tiny fraction of the surrounding weights. In this
regime, it is important to have a smart search algorithm, such as gradient descent or other forms of iterative optimization. Right:
Large models are surrounded by a veritable thicket of task-specific solutions. In this regime, random sampling is sufficient to
quickly land on promising adaptations, which can then be ensembled to yield strong behavior, an approach we call RandOpt.
(b) Solution density – i.e. density of task-improving weights in a Gaussian neighborhood of the pretrained weights – scales
with model size. (c) RandOpt is O(1) in training steps, FLOP-efficient, and competitive in converged accuracy with GRPO and
ES. Results are shown on the Countdown task with Olmo-3-7B-Instruct; RandOpt uses 5000 random weight guesses and
ensembles the top K; K-pass baselines use Test-time Majority Vote (TT-MV). More results are shown in Fig. 6 and Table 4.
Abstract
Pretraining produces a learned parameter vector that is typically treated as a starting point for further
iterative adaptation. In this work, we instead view the outcome of pretraining as a distribution over
parameter vectors, whose support already contains task-specific experts. We show that in small
models such expert solutions occupy a negligible fraction of the volume of this distribution, making
their discovery reliant on structured optimization methods such as gradient descent. In contrast,
in large, well-pretrained models the density of task-experts increases dramatically, so that diverse,
task-improving specialists populate a substantial fraction of the neighborhood around the pretrained
weights. Motivated by this perspective, we explore a simple, fully parallel post-training method that
samples N parameter perturbations at random, selects the top K, and ensembles predictions via
majority vote. Despite its simplicity, this approach is competitive with standard post-training methods
such as PPO, GRPO, and ES for contemporary large-scale models.
Project page: https://thickets.mit.edu
Code: https://github.com/sunrainyg/RandOpt
arXiv:2603.12228v1  [cs.LG]  12 Mar 2026
1
Introduction
“[Random guessing] cannot be viewed as a reasonable learning algorithm...”
— Schmidhuber, Hochreiter, Bengio, 2001
One of the first algorithms we learn in elementary school is “guess and check.” In its simplest form the
procedure is almost trivial: given an equation with unknowns, guess values of the unknowns and check whether
they satisfy the equation. Guess again, completely at random, until it works. The same approach can be applied to
machine learning, but it has long been assumed to be hopeless, as the quote above implies (Schmidhuber et al.,
2001). Consider, for example, the chance of randomly guessing, from scratch, a billion-dimensional parameter
vector that behaves like ChatGPT. The probability must be astronomically small.
This paper finds that after pretraining, the story changes. With a reasonable number of random guesses, one
can sample parameter perturbations that substantially improve pretrained large language models (LLMs) across a
broad set of tasks. How is this possible? For random guessing to work, good solutions must be dense under the
distribution being sampled from. Schmidhuber, Hochreiter, and Bengio made precisely this point in their 2001
paper: random guessing did solve some benchmark problems of that era. However, they interpreted this as a failure
of the benchmarks to assess difficult skills. We instead show that the same phenomenon occurs in a contemporary
setting of practical interest: post-training LLMs on tasks such as reasoning, programming, and more.
How does the loss landscape change after pretraining, in order that random guessing begins to work? We
study two effects. First we measure the density of task-improving solutions in a Gaussian neighborhood around
the pretrained weights. We find that this density increases with pretraining scale. Untrained models have a tiny
density of solutions near their initial weights; they live in a needle in a haystack regime, where finding the solution
requires structured multi-step search, such as gradient descent. Conversely, large pretrained models transition into
a regime of high density, replete with task-experts near the pretrained weights. We term this the thicket regime.
Next, we study solution diversity in the Gaussian neighborhood. It turns out that the different sampled parameter
vectors are not uniform improvements. They are specialists rather than generalists, where the perturbations that
most improve performance on one task hurt performance on other tasks. We visualize these two effects in Figure 1.
Motivated by these findings, we explore a fully parallel post-training algorithm that exploits the density and
diversity of pretrained neighborhoods. The method is a form of random guessing (which works due to the
neighborhood density) followed by ensembling (which exploits the neighborhood diversity). Given an initial
weight vector, N perturbations of that vector are created. Each perturbation is evaluated on the post-training
data. The top K perturbations are selected and their predictions are ensembled via majority voting. We call this
algorithm RandOpt.
RandOpt achieves accuracy competitive with PPO, GRPO, and ES under the same post-training flops. On the
wall-clock it trains in O(1) time compared to O(T) for the baselines that require T sequential update steps. Its
inference-time cost is K times higher due to ensembling. For some tasks, K = 1 already achieves decent results.
For other tasks, only larger K is competitive with the baselines, but in Section 7, we show a proof of concept that
this cost can be reduced via distillation. However, our goal is not to promote RandOpt as superior to alternative
methods. Rather, we use it as a probe: its success suggests that post-training becomes easy once you have a strong
pretrained representation – i.e., once you enter the thicket regime. In that regime, it doesn’t matter much which
method you use – gradient-based search, evolutionary algorithms, and brute-force parallel selection all will do.
Main Findings
1. In large models, the neighborhood around pretrained weights is dense with task-improving solutions (Fig 2).
2. The density exhibits a scaling law, with higher density for larger, more performant models (Fig 3).
3. The local neighborhood is also diverse: individual perturbations tend to improve performance on particular
tasks while degrading others (Fig 4). Diversity also scales with model size (Fig 3).
4. For current models, the density is high enough that random guessing is effective for post-training (Fig 6).
5. Ensembling over multiple guessed solutions further improves performance, often substantially (Fig 11).
2
Figure 2: Accuracy landscapes in weight space across model scales and reasoning tasks. We perturb the pretrained Qwen2.5
models (from 0.5B to 32B) with 1000 random weight perturbations and project the perturbed models into 2D using random
projection. Colors show relative accuracy change (acc −base)/base × 100 (blue: degraded, white: equivalent, red: improved.)
Dashed circles indicate the mean perturbation distance and stars mark the best-performing perturbations. Larger models have
warmer landscapes, with more high-performing neighborhoods. The last column shows an RGB visualization where GSM8K,
Olympiad and Countdown accuracies are mapped to R,G,B channels; richer colors indicate more task experts.
2
Structure of the Multi-task Loss Landscape Around Pretrained Weights
In this section, we measure the density and diversity of task-improving solutions in the vicinity of pretrained
weights, across models of different scale and a variety of tasks.
2.1
Solution Density: What Proportion of Local Perturbations Improve Task Performance?
Figure 2 visualizes the performance of Gaussian-perturbed models across scales from 0.5B to 32B parameters, and
on three reasoning tasks. A topographic shift is evident: small models reside on local maxima of the accuracy
landscape, whereas larger models inhabit an accuracy “valley,” with many peaks of higher accuracy nearby (red
regions). This indicates that scaling may fundamentally reshape the loss landscape. Given this change, what is the
probability of finding good solutions? We define the solution density as:
Definition 2.1 (Solution Density). Let s : Rd →R be the performance evaluation metric for model parameters
θ ∈Rd. We define the Solution Density δ(m) as the probability that a random perturbation ϵ improves the base
model’s score by a margin m:
δ(m) = Pϵ∼N (0,σ2I) [s(θ + ϵ) ≥s(θ) + m]
(1)
where σ scales the local Gaussian neighborhood (in the experiments in this section, we use σ = 0.005). Intuitively,
δ(m) measures the “hit rate” of random guessing: it quantifies the proportion of the explored parameter space that
yields a performance gain of at least m.
In Figure 3, we measure δ(m), for several values of m, as a function of model scale. Solution density increases
monotonically with model size, and this trend holds over multiple values of m (e.g., the density of perturbations
that increase performance by +5% accuracy increases monotonically as a function of model scale). These results
3
0.5B
1.5B
3B
32B
Model Scale (Parameters)
0%
15%
30%
45%
60%
75%
90%
Solution Density (m)
GSM8K
Threshold (% of base)
90%
95%
98%
100%
103%
105%
0.5B
1.5B
3B
32B
Model Scale (Parameters)
0%
15%
30%
45%
60%
75%
Countdown
Threshold (% of base)
90%
95%
100%
105%
110%
115%
0.5B
1.5B
3B
32B
Model Scale (Parameters)
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Spectral Discordance 
Scaling Law of the Solution Density
Scaling Law of the Solution Diversity
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Scaling laws of solution density and diversity (using Qwen-2.5 instruction tuned models). (a) Solution density
increases with model scale, showing that larger models have a higher fraction of good solutions. (b) Spectral discordance across
model scales, measuring solution diversity. Together, these results demonstrate that larger models have both denser and more
diverse solution landscapes in the neighborhood around their pretrained weights.
indicate that, for large-scale models, the pretrained weights reside within a dense basin populated by abundant
high-quality solutions, whose density scales with model size.
2.2
Solution Diversity: Are the Sampled Perturbations Specialists or Generalists?
Do all perturbations help (or hurt) in the same way? We compare two hypotheses:
1. Hypothesis 1 (generalists): The pretrained weights are in fact a poor model for the suite of downstream tasks
we are testing; there is an all-around better model in the vicinity of these weights.
2. Hypothesis 2 (specialists): The pretrained weights are a “jack of all trades, master of none”; perturbations
can improve a given task because they are specialists for that task, improving its performance while hurting
performance on other tasks.
We test these hypotheses using the following measure of specialization:
Definition 2.2 (Spectral Discordance). Let P ∈[0, 1]N×M denote the percentile-rank matrix over N seeds and M
tasks, and let C ∈RM×M be the Pearson correlation matrix of its columns. We define the Spectral Discordance as:
D = 1 −
1
M(M −1) ∑
j̸=k
Cjk
(2)
where Cjk denotes the correlation between tasks j and k. A value of D →1 implies orthogonal task rankings
(specialists), while D →0 implies parallel rankings (generalists).
Remark. Theoretically, D is bounded in the interval [0,
M
M−1]. The upper bound corresponds to the limit of
anti-correlation. We provide the derivation in Appendix H.
We evaluate 500 random weight perturbations across seven tasks in four domains: mathematical reasoning
(Countdown, GSM8K, MATH-500, OlympiadBench), code generation (MBPP), creative writing (ROCStories), and
chemistry (USPTO). For each perturbation, we compute its percentile rank relative to the population. We then
quantify diversity using the Spectral Discordance D over all the perturbations. Figure 3(b) shows the result over
models of different size in the Qwen2.5 family: D increases monotonically with model size, indicating that the
solutions surrounding larger models become increasingly disjoint in their capabilities. This supports Hypothesis 2:
the sampled solutions are specialists.
To visually unpack the structure of this discordance, Figures 4 and 7 present further analyses:
(1) Performance Spectra (Figure 4 Left): We plot the percentile ranks of individual perturbations across tasks.
The resulting lines are “spiky” rather than flat. This visually demonstrates specialization and diversity among the
sampled perturbations.
4
Countdown
(Math)
GSM8K
(Math)
MATH-500
(Math)
OlyBench
(Math)
MBPP
(Programming)
ROCStories
(Writing)
USPTO
(Chemistry)
Evaluation Dataset
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Percentile Rank
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
PC1
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
PC2
Figure 4: Performance spectra and clustering of random seeds. Sampled vectors possess diverse areas of expertise, with
individual seeds specializing in specific tasks. (Left) Performance of 100 random seeds across seven evaluation datasets. Each
line represents a specific seed, with four lines highlighted as examples. (Right) PCA visualization of these performance vectors,
where seeds with similar behavior cluster together into different groups.
(2) PCA Projection (Figure 4 Right): We project the 7-dimensional performance vectors into 2D and apply
K-means clustering. The emergence of distinct clusters confirms that there are multiple kinds of experts within the
distribution. Perturbations within a cluster share specific strengths (e.g., excelling at math but failing at chemistry),
while perturbations in different clusters offer complementary capabilities.
(3) The level of diversity is also visible in Figure 7. Under the column labeled “RGB”, we plot three different
task-accuracy landscapes in the R, G, and B channels respectively. The fact that there is a mottled, multi-colored
appearance indicates that the landscapes are largely uncorrelated (we would expect to see shades of gray if all
tasks behaved the same).
These findings reveal that the local weight space is populated by diverse specialists. This raises a key question:
can we exploit this landscape by simply sampling these complementary experts and aggregating their strengths?
We will return to this question in Section 4.
3
A Minimal Setting In Which Thickets Emerge: Autoregressive Modeling
of 1D Signals
What leads to thickets emerging? To elucidate the cause, we replicate the phenomenon in a minimal setting.
We define a training distribution that is a mixture of several random function types (sinusoidal, linear, harmonic,
sigmoidal, and sawtooth and square waves), each of which maps R →R and takes on random settings for the
function parameters (e.g., phase and amplitude for sinusoids, slope and intercept for lines). We pretrain a
next-value predictor on these functions, using a multilayer perceptron fθ : yctx →ynext, where yctx is a preceding
context window and ynext is the next value of the target function. This model can generate predictions by
autoregressive rollout given an initial observed context. We probe this model with a simple linear test signal. Is
this signal well-modeled by sampled perturbations near the pretrained weights?
We sample N = 1000 random Gaussian parameter perturbations from ϵ ∼N (0, σ = 0.002). In Figure 5, we
show autoregressive rollouts of the base and perturbed models given the test context. The blue line is the test
function, with solid blue as the observed context and dashed blue as the ground truth continuation. The gray lines
are predictions given by different random perturbations. The base, unperturbed model’s predictions are shown in
black. The top 5 perturbations that best fit the blue line are shown in red.
We compare three pretraining settings: 1) no pretraining (Xavier initialization,
Glorot & Bengio (2010)),
2) pretraining on all signal types, 3) pretraining on linear signals. These three settings lead to three different
regimes: 1) the needle in the haystack regime, where small perturbations of the weights have negligible effect on
the functional shape; good solutions are far away from this initialization, 2) the thicket regime, where different
5
(a) Needle in Haystack regime
Pretraining: none
(b) Thicket regime
Pretraining: mixed signals
(c) Plateau regime
Pretraining: linear signals
Figure 5: Pretraining a model of 1D signals, then probing the local neighborhood around the pretrained weights by random
guessing N = 1000 Gaussian perturbations. The plot shows the autoregressive predictions of a particular linear function
(dashed blue line), given an observed context (solid blue line). Gray lines: random fθ’s; Red lines: top-K fθ’s. The figure shows
three regimes: (a) No pretraining leads to needle-in-the-haystack search, (b) pretraining on several signal types leads to a
thicket, (c) pretraining on just linear functions achieves nearly perfect predictions at pretraining time, hence post-training is at
ceiling.
perturbations search over many possible continuations following the kinds of functions seen during pretraining,
and 3) a “plateau” regime, where the pretrained weights are already a minimizer of the test task, and random
guessing can provide no further benefit.
This experiment demonstrates that the phenomena we are observing are not exclusive to LLMs, and show up
in simpler models as well. What appears to be critical is that the base model is pretrained on a variety of signal
shapes. Too little pretraining results in no nearby solutions and pretraining on just one signal type results in nearby
weights showing very little functional diversity. See Appendix F for more examples, including generalization to
held out test signals, the effect of ensembling, and settings of weight initialization and pretraining type.
4
A Practical Algorithm: Random Guessing & Ensembling (RandOpt)
The fact that valid solutions are easy to find but possess non-overlapping strengths, suggests that rather than
searching for a single global minimum, we might instead sample broadly and aggregate the predictions. We
therefore explore an algorithm, which we call RandOpt, that randomly guesses a set of N weight perturbations, and
then ensembles the top K.
Let fθ : X →Y denote a base model parameterized by weights θ ∈Rd. We introduce perturbations via a noise
vector ϵ sampled from a standard Gaussian distribution, ϵ ∼N (0, Id). The magnitude of each perturbation is
controlled by a noise scale σ ∈R+. To explore neighborhoods at different scales, we use a set of scaling factors
Σ = {σ1, . . . , σM}. A perturbed model instance θ′ is determined by a random seed s and a selected scale σ ∈Σ:
θ′ = θ + σ · ϵ(s)
(3)
where ϵ(s) denotes the noise vector generated by seed s.
RandOpt operates in two phases: Random Guessing (Training) and Ensembling (Inference), which are given in
pseudocode in Algorithm 1 and described in math below:
Training: Random Guessing and Checking. We sample a population of N random seeds {s1, . . . , sN}, and a
corresponding noise scale per seed, {σ1, . . . , σN}, with all σi sampled uniformly from Σ. These give a collection of
N parameter vectors θi = θ + σiϵ(si). Each corresponding model fθi is evaluated on a small training or validation
set Dtrain to obtain a performance score vi. We then select the top-K performing models based on these scores:
Itop = arg topK
i∈[N]
(vi)
(4)
6
Algorithm 1: RandOpt (PyTorch-style). N: population size, K: ensemble size. sigmas: noise
scales, theta: model params
1 # Training: Select top-K seeds based on D_train performance
2 seeds = [sample_seed() for _ in range(N)]
3 ## assign sigma to each seed
4 sigmas_per_seed = [sigmas[i // (N // len(sigmas))]
5
for i in range(N)]
6
7 ## evaluate all perturbed models
8 scores = [evaluate(theta + sigmas_per_seed[i] * eps(seed[i]), D_train)
9
for i in range(N)]
10 top_indices = topk(scores, K).indices
11
12 # Inference: Ensemble predictions on test input x
13 answers = [generate(theta + sigmas_per_seed[i] * eps(seed[i]), x)
14
for i in top_indices]
15 prediction = majority_vote(answers)
Inference: Ensembling of Predictions. For a test input x, we generate predictions using only the selected set Itop.
The final output ˆy is obtained by aggregating the individual predictions via majority voting:
ˆy = mode
 (
arg max
y
fθi(y|x) | i ∈Itop
)!
(5)
RandOpt differs from standard practice in several ways. First, it does not involve gradient steps, and in fact
does not involve sequential updates at all – it is entirely parallel. Second, it finds a set of solutions, which can be
ensembled, rather than a single setting of the weights. This latter property has also been explored in the literature
on evolutionary methods and quality-diversity algorithms, which maintain a population of promising solutions
rather than collapsing on a single parameter vector (e.g., Mouret & Clune (2015); Jaderberg et al. (2017); Huang
et al. (2017)).
5
How Does RandOpt Compare to Standard Methods for Post-Training?
We test RandOpt on post-training of LLMs and VLMs, and find it to be effective across a range of settings, often
outperforming standard baselines. Although these results are strong, the reader should keep in mind that on these
benchmarks performance can be sensitive to minor stylistic and formatting changes. Section 8 analyzes where the
performance gains are coming from and argues that they are partially from reasoning improvements and partially
from formatting improvements; notably, this is also true for certain baselines.
5.1
RandOpt on Large Language Models
We evaluate several models (Qwen, Llama, OLMo3; 0.5B–8B) covering both base and instruct variants, across four
domains: math (Countdown, GSM8K, MATH-500, OlyBench), code (MBPP), writing (ROCStories), and chemistry
(USPTO). We compare RandOpt against Test-Time Majority Vote (TT-MV), PPO, GRPO, and ES. Full details on
datasets, models, and baselines are in Appendices A–C.
Our main finding is that RandOpt (with K = 50) mostly matches or outperforms established methods across a
range of model scales (0.5B to 8B) and task categories. Benchmark performance compared to baselines, all run
with equal training flops, is shown in Figure 6. More comparisons are given in Appendix D.
Notably, this performance is achieved while RandOpt involves no sequential optimization steps, whereas
the baselines are run for hundreds of steps (see Appendix Table E.3 for hyperparameter settings). This gives
RandOpt a potentially large wall-clock advantage, provided it is run on a large enough cluster of parallel compute.
7
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Base Accuracy (%)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
RandOpt Accuracy (%)
RandOpt better
Base better
RandOpt vs Base
Benchmark
Countdown (math)
GSM8k (math)
MATH-500 (math)
OlyBench (math)
MBPP (prog.)
ROCStories (writing)
USPTO (chem.)
Parity
Benchmark
Countdown (math)
GSM8k (math)
MATH-500 (math)
OlyBench (math)
MBPP (prog.)
ROCStories (writing)
USPTO (chem.)
Parity
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
PPO/GRPO Accuracy (%)
RandOpt better
PPO/GRPO better
(max of PPO and GRPO)
RandOpt vs 1-pass PPO/GRPO
Model
  Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
  Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct
  Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
  OLMo3-7B
  OLMo3-7B-Instruct
  Llama3.1-8B-Instruct
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
ES+TT-MV Accuracy (%)
RandOpt better
ES+TT-MV better
RandOpt vs ES+TT-MV
Model
  Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
  Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct
  Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
  OLMo3-7B
  OLMo3-7B-Instruct
  Llama3.1-8B-Instruct
Figure 6: RandOpt vs. baselines on post-training LLMs. Marker size represents model scale (0.5-8B), shape indicates task family,
and transparency distinguishes benchmarks within each task family. RandOpt matches or exceeds baselines in most settings.
RandOpt is run with K=50 and ES+TT-MV also uses 50 test-time samples ensembled via majority vote. 1-pass PPO/GRPO use
a single test-time sample; this setting disadvantages the baseline but reflects current standard usage of these models, in which
there is no test-time ensembling. Full experimental results can be found in Appendix Table 4.
To demonstrate this, we deployed RandOpt on a 200 GH200 cluster and trained Olmo-3-7B-Instruct on
Countdown. Using N = 2000, K = 50, this takes 3.2 minutes and achieves 70% accuracy.
These experiments also reveal that the ensembling phase is crucial to RandOpt’s performance. RandOpt with
K=1 is substantially less effective than RandOpt with K=50, as shown in Figure 1 (c) as well as Figure 11.
5.2
RandOpt on Vision-Language Models
Table 1: RandOpt improves Accuracy (%) on GQA.
Model
Method
GQA
Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Inst
Base
56.6
RandOpt
69.0
We conduct experiments on Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct, a 3B-
parameter vision-language model (VLM). We evaluate on the
Visual Reasoning in the Real World (GQA) dataset (Hudson
& Manning, 2019), which contains questions requiring under-
standing of objects, attributes, and relations in images and
is commonly used to benchmark visual reasoning ability. We
perturb the language model while keeping the visual encoder frozen, and run RandOpt with N = 5000 and K = 50.
This improves accuracy on GQA by 12.4% (Table 1).
5.3
Can Sandbagging Explain These Results?
Tice et al. (2025) argued that some models might be “sandbagged,” where they are explicitly or implicitly trained to
have low performance on certain tasks. Random weights perturbations might recover performance by breaking this
effect. Can this explain our results? We think not. Most notably, RandOpt substantially improves the OLMo3-7B
Base model (see Appendix Table 4). Since OLMo’s training data and recipes are open-source, we can verify that this
model is free of intentional sandbagging. We provide further arguments against sandbagging as an explanation in
Appendix G. However, even if sandbagging is not the right explanation, this does not mean that there could not be
similarly superficial fixes that underlie the performance gains; in Section 8 we look into this in more detail and
find that indeed some, but not all, of the gains are due to simply fixing answer format.
5.4
Can Ensembling Also Benefit the Baselines?
Yes, ensembling (e.g., 50-pass TT-MV) consistently improves baseline methods across various model scales and
benchmarks. For example, in Figure 1(c), it boosts the accuracy of PPO, GRPO, and ES to approximately 79% by
8
1%
2%
5% 10% 20% 35% 50% 75%100%
Selection Ratio (K/N)
10
30
100
300
1K
3K
10K
30K
100K
Population Size (N)
11.2
11.2
11.2
11.2
16.7
20.4
29.9
34.1
38.1
12.6
12.6
12.6
27.1
34.6
40.8
44.6
48.5
50.8
16.8
25.4
37.5
43.5
48.4
51.4
53.4
54.2
55.2
34.5
40.5
47.1
51.0
53.5
55.3
55.7
56.3
56.7
46.5
50.9
55.0
56.8
58.0
57.9
57.1
57.2
57.9
53.7
55.4
57.5
58.5
58.4
57.6
58.0
57.6
58.0
57.4
58.4
58.2
58.2
59.0
58.6
58.8
58.3
58.4
57.9
59.0
58.9
59.0
59.1
58.8
57.8
57.9
57.5
60.5
59.3
59.0
58.9
59.2
58.9
58.3
57.9
57.2
10
30
45
52
55
57
58
59
60
Accuracy (%)
Figure 7: Heatmap of accuracy across population size N and
selection ratio K/N. Accuracy scales with population size.
Task: Countdown, Model: Qwen2.5-3B-Inst.
0.1B
0.5B
1.5B
7B
14B
32B
Base Model Scale
0%
20%
40%
60%
70%
Accuracy
RandOpt from scratch
RandOpt around pretrained weights
Base model
GPT-2 0.1B
Qwen 0.5B
Qwen 1.5B
Qwen 7B
Qwen 14B
Qwen 32B
Figure 8: Relationship between model scale and RandOpt
performance. Good pretrained representations are important
for RandOpt start to work. Task: Countdown, N = 3k, K = 50.
step 500. Table 4 also suggests this. For example, ES + TT-MV increases the GSM8k accuracy of Qwen2.5-0.5B from
42.6% to 61.2%.
In fact, ensembling benefits these models regardless of the specific selection method used during training (e.g.,
random guessing, GRPO, or ES). Interestingly, as training progresses, the ensembled performance gap among
these different baselines gradually shrinks (Figure 1(c)).
6
Scaling Properties of RandOpt
We investigate how RandOpt performance scales with respect to the search budget (population size N), the
ensemble size (K), and the base model size.
Impact of Population Size and Selection Ratio. Figure 7 measures the interplay between search budget (N) and
selection ratio (K/N) on the Countdown task, with Qwen2.5-3B-Inst (see Appendix Figure 10 for further slices of
this data). Note that the precise shape of these trends may vary from task to task and model to model, and here
we only show results for Countdown. Two observations:
(1) For sufficiently low selection ratio, performance improves monotonically with population size N.
(2) Trade-off between N and K/N: the optimal selection ratio decreases with increasing population size.
Note that the top-1 model’s performance on the training set is, by construction, non-decreasing in N. This
is consistent with observation #1; if a practitioner wants to avoid hyperparameter tuning, a reasonable strategy
would therefore be to set K small and set N as large as their budget can afford.
The Emergence of Thickets at Scale. Figure 8 illustrates the relationship between base model scale and RandOpt’s
performance, showing that a strong base model is essential for RandOpt to start to work. The blue line corresponds
to applying RandOpt to the base models, and the green dashed line is the performance of the base models. For
very small models, such as GPT-2 0.1B, RandOpt fails to improve performance; for small models (e.g., Qwen
0.5B), RandOpt also offers small gains over the baseline. However, starting at around 1.5B parameters, RandOpt
triggers a rapid increase in accuracy. After this point, the base model accuracy begins to catch up and the relative
improvement of RandOpt shrinks as the models plateau. Using RandOpt on a model that has not been pretrained
(“RandOpt from scratch,” red dotted line) remains near zero across all scales. These results suggest that sufficient
pretraining and sufficient model scale are essential for RandOpt to work; this matches our finding in Section 2 for
the conditions under which thickets emerge.
9
7
Distillation
A catch with RandOpt, compared to standard post-training, is that good performance requires K forward passes at
test time. To address this, we explore distilling the top-K models into a single model.
We perform distillation on the Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct models. We only use hard
samples: for each input, we generate eight candidate answers and keep those for which more than half of the
candidates are incorrect.
Table 2: Distilling the top-K RandOpt ensemble into a
single model achieves performance comparable to the
ensemble on GSM8K.
Model
Method
GSM8K
Qwen2.5-1.5B-Inst.
Base
58.8
Distill
74.9
RandOpt
76.4
Qwen2.5-3B-Inst.
Base
79.8
Distill
84.3
RandOpt
87.1
We use the top-50 models to generate 25,000 responses
on 500 training examples. Each training sample is a pair
(x, [r; y]), where x is the input question, r is the reasoning
trace, and y is the final answer. We then select hard examples
and perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the base model
for 2 epochs, obtaining a distilled model. Specifically, let
s = (s1, s2, . . . , sT) denote the full token sequence [x; r; y],
and let Tx be the length of x. The SFT objective minimizes
the negative log-likelihood of the reasoning trace and final
answer:
LDistill(θ) = −
T
∑
t=Tx+1
log pθ(st | x, s<t) ,
(6)
where θ denotes the model parameters. The input question x is the context (with its loss masked), and the model
learns to autoregressively generate the reasoning trace and final answer [r; y].
The computational cost of distillation is small compared to training. Since training uses a population size of
5,000, and distillation only uses the top-50 models and runs for 10 SGD iterations, the cost of distillation is about
2% of the training cost.
8
Types of Thickets
It is possible that the effects we have observed do not arise from models in the thicket employing fundamentally
different forms of reasoning, but instead from differences that are comparatively shallow. For example, models
may vary instead in surface-level behaviors such as answer formatting or style. Task performance can be highly
sensitive to such factors: a system that expects outputs in JSON may fail entirely if a model instead emits free-form
text. Are our results simply due to random perturbations improving output formatting?
We test this by measuring how much of the improvement on GSM8K is attributable to formatting fixes versus
correcting the actual numerical answer. On 1319 test data samples, we decompose performance, relative to the
base model, into 1) retained correctness, 2) base wrong, adapted model correct (indicating a “reasoning thicket”,
where perturbations can help the model solve reasoning problems it could not solve before), 3) format fixed, then
counted as correct (indicating a “format thicket”, where the base model solved the problem but output the answer
in a format that was marked as incorrect by a strict answer checker, e.g., the answer was not placed after the proper
tag “####”), and 4) base correct, adapted model incorrect (a regression in model ability).
Results are shown in Figure 9. RandOpt (K = 50), reaches 86.7% overall accuracy with 0.7% regression, while
still showing substantial contributions from both format (19.0%) and reasoning (12.3%) thickets.
This experiment demonstrates that thickets can come in a variety of types: we might have thickets of different
answer formats, thickets of reasoning approaches, thickets of personalities, thickets of domain knowledge, and
more. All of these in combination could contribute to task experts being dense and diverse, since to be an expert at
a task, as defined in this paper, simply requires doing well on the benchmark for that task and benchmarks measure a
combination of format, skill, personality, knowledge, and more. Beyond language models, in Appendix J, we show
a case of “color thickets” in an image generative model.
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy  (%)
Base
Model
GRPO
RandOpt
Top-1
RandOpt
Ens. K=50
56.1
56.1%
52.2
9.5
20.4
82.0%
41.4
16.7
9.9
67.9%
55.4
12.3
19.0
86.7%
740 + 0 + 0
0 = 740
740 + 125 + 269
52 = 1082
740 + 220 + 130
194 = 896
740 + 162 + 250
9 = 1143
Strictly Correct (correct answer & format)
Reasoning Thicket (base wrong, method corrects)
Format Thicket (format fixed, then counted correct)
Regression (base correct, method changes to wrong)
Figure 9: Accuracy decomposition on GSM8k using Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct (N=3000, K=50). Grey denotes strictly correct answers
(both format and answer correct), light blue denotes the questions originally answered incorrectly that are corrected after
training, and purple denotes the gains are just from fixing format. For both GRPO and RandOpt, a large portion of the gains
come from format correction, while another portion is from solving the problem correctly.
9
Related Work
9.1
Structure of the Neural Net Loss Landscape
Flat Minima A prominent finding in the loss landscape literature is that training tends toward flat minima (Keskar
et al., 2017). Our findings reveal that flat minima can be hiding important structure below the surface: per-task,
the local accuracy landscape is not nearly so flat and the pretrained weights can even lie in a trough of accuracy.
Pretraining aggregates over many tasks, hence a flat pretraining landscape is compatible with spiky per-task losses.
Multi-Task Loss Landscapes A large body of work aims to characterize the loss landscape of neural nets trained
for a single objective (e.g,. Li et al. (2018); Choromanska et al. (2015)). Thickets, in contrast, are a property of the
multi-task landscape. Prior work that takes a similar perspective includes Pareto front learning, where paths in
weight space are identified that tradeoff between different task objectives (Ma et al., 2020), and multi-task linear
mode connectivity, where linear paths of low loss are observed between the minimizers of different tasks (Mirzadeh
et al., 2020).
On Lottery Tickets and Neural Thickets The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis suggests that, when training from scratch,
finding a good initialization is akin to winning the lottery: random initialization will only rarely sample weights
that train well (Frankle & Carbin, 2019). Our findings are compatible with this view, but suggest a qualitatively
different regime after pretraining. At transfer time, the neighborhood around the initialization (i.e. around the
pretrained weights) becomes abundant with good solutions.
9.2
Post-Training as Selection
Reweighting the Pretrained Policy Many works have observed that certain post-training methods can be
interpreted as reweighting behaviors already present in the pretrained distribution. For example, KL-regularized
methods such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) constrain the policy to remain close to the pretrained model, and can
be interpreted as reweighting the pretrained distribution (Rafailov et al., 2023).
Self-improvement by Trace Selection In the self-improvement literature, a common recipe is to use test-time
search to select good reasoning traces, and then train these traces back into the model weights (e.g., Zelikman
et al. (2022); Xiong et al. (2025)). These approaches aim to convert high pass@k performance into high pass@1
performance. Our results are consistent with the view that post-training selects or sharpens skills that are already
11
latent in the pretrained model. While prior work characterizes how probability mass can be reweighted in
output-space, we instead characterize the geometry of nearby weight-space optima.
9.3
Randomized Search and Evolutionary Methods
Random Search Can Be Effective for Training and Inference with Neural Nets Many prior papers have shown
that sequential random search methods are competitive with RL for control problems (e.g., Salimans et al. (2017);
Mania et al. (2018)) and even for post-training LLMs (Qiu et al., 2025). However, we are not aware of prior work
that demonstrated the same for the parallel search case, except in very simple scenarios, such as those explored
by Schmidhuber et al. (2001) and by Oller et al. (2020). Parallel guess-and-check methods, such as Best-of-N, are
also commonly used at test-time to improve model performance, and these methods perform well compared to
more sophisticated inference methods (Wu et al., 2025). We note that the training phase of RandOpt is essentially
Best-of-N in weight-space, rather than in output space. Given a verifier or reward signal, RandOpt could be
applied at test-time as well.
Spurious Rewards Can Sometimes Be Effective For some tasks, we find that density is so high that most Gaussian
perturbations increase task accuracy (Figure 12). This phenomenon may provide a partial explanation of the recent
finding that post-training on random or spurious rewards can sometimes be effective (Shao et al., 2025). Such
rewards provide gradients in the wrong direction, but this wrong direction might still, by chance, be sufficiently
right.
Evolving Adaptable Initializations The central conceit of our paper is that pretraining draws weights toward
regions surrounded by adaptive specialists. Simpson (1953) argued that this property also holds true for evolved
genomes, referring to this as the “Baldwin Effect,” in reference to prior work by James Baldwin (Baldwin, 1896).
Hinton et al. (1987) provided an initial computational model of this effect. In short, evolution tends toward inits
from which within-life learning can quickly adapt. These works provide a backdrop for modern methods in
meta-learning, which optimize for neural net initializations from which task-specific solutions are a short step
away. Prominent in this family is the MAML algorithm of Finn et al. (2017). Our results indicate that pretraining is
implicitly finding a MAML-like init.
9.4
Direct Models of Weight Space
Bayesian Neural Nets and Parameter Noise Bayesian neural nets treat parameters as random variables, which
can be sampled from to estimate distributions over outputs (Goan & Fookes, 2020). This approach is often used
to quantify uncertainty and calibrate predictions, or to improve predictions by ensembling over samples (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016). Our new observation is that pretrained weights can be usefully treated as Gaussian random
variables even when they were not trained to have this property. In other words, we view pretrained nets as
implicitly defining a distribution of representations about their weights. This differs from prior works on Bayesian
methods that explicitly represent these distributions. Of prior approaches, PEP (Mehrtash et al., 2020) is especially
close to RandOpt. PEP computes an ensemble of predictions from Gaussian perturbations of model weights; unlike
RandOpt, however, PEP has no selection step, aside from optimizing the variance of the Gaussian.
Weight Space Model Editing While most learning methods manipulate weights indirectly, e.g., by backpropagat-
ing errors, there is also work on directly manipulating weights. Cherepkov et al. (2021) found that linear directions
in the weight space of a generative adversarial network map to interpretable edits of the generated image; this is
a weight-space analog to the popular notion that activation-space admits interpretable linear edits (Park et al.,
2024). Dravid et al. (2024) found that similarly simple weight manipulations work for diffusion models. More
broadly, low-rank weight manipulations have become especially popular for model editing (Hu et al., 2022), as we
discuss more next. Collectively, these works suggest that in weight-space, meaningful adaptations require only
minor changes. The thickets phenomenon could help explain why.
12
9.5
Low-dimensional structure in LLM fine-tuning
Intrinsic dimension and parameter-efficient fine-tuning. Prior work (Aghajanyan et al., 2020) shows that fine-
tuning often succeeds within a surprisingly small random subspace of parameters, suggesting that downstream
adaptation is effectively low-dimensional despite the enormous parameter space of LLMs. Consistent with this view,
parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) restrict updates to low-rank components
while freezing most of the base model, yet still achieve competitive performance across many tasks. More recently,
Morris et al. (2026) showed that math reasoning tasks can be learned by updating only 13 parameters.
Low-dimensional curvature in LLM fine-tuning. Liang et al. (2026) shows that LLM fine-tuning landscapes
exhibit low-dimensional curvature, where a small number of directions dominate reward improvements. Random
projections have a higher chance of intersecting with a large, degenerate set of reward-improving directions
as a consequence of the low-dimensionality. This view suggests interpreting the thickets phenomenon as the
intersection of (a) a broad loss basin induced by pretraining and overparameterization, and (b) a set of task-relevant
directions that are effectively low-dimensional (or low-rank) but embedded within the full parameter space.
10
Implications
10.1
Rethinking Pretraining
Pretrained Models as Distributions We typically refer to the “pretrained model” as a singular thing; it’s the base
model, or it’s a foundation model, on top of which further improvements can be made. Our results suggest that you
can instead think about your pretrained weights as specifying a distribution over models. This distribution resists
characterization just in terms of its mean: rather it contains diverse specialists whose behavior is qualitatively
different from the singular pretrained weights.
Understanding Pretraining Requires Characterizing the Multi-task Loss Landscape While the pretraining
objective necessarily exhibits a local minimum at converged weights, our findings suggest that this scalar landscape
obscures important structure. In particular, what governs downstream adaptation is not a single loss surface, but
the collection of task-specific loss landscapes corresponding to different downstream objectives. The pretrained
weights might not be a minimizer of any individual element of this collection, but lie in a region surrounded by
task-specific minima. This structure is invisible when analyzing the aggregate pretraining objective, and only
emerges when that objective is decomposed into its constituent task-level losses.
10.2
Rethinking Post-Training
Pretraining Is All You Need? We have shown that once a model has been sufficiently pretrained, further adaptation
can be remarkably easy. This finding mirrors prior work, including: Tian et al. (2020) found that linear probes over
pretrained representations can outperform sophisticated meta-learners; Finn & Levine (2018) proved that, given a
good enough representation, gradient descent can approximate any learning algorithm; Qiu et al. (2025) showed
that relatively simple algorithms such as ES can rival state-of-the-art RL methods for post-training LLMs. These
are a few of the papers that, together with our work, suggest that it doesn’t take much to obtain good downstream
solutions given the right pretrained representation.
Decentralized, Parallel Adaptation RandOpt workers operate fully in parallel, and do not communicate with
each other during training. Only at inference time do the workers interact, and only through ensembling their
predictions. This may be attractive in a setting where compute nodes are cheap but communication is at a premium.
Prior work has argued that ES requires less communication bandwidth than certain RL methods (Salimans et al.,
2017), and RandOpt is cheaper still: T steps of ES requires communicating scores T times, while RandOpt requires
communicating scores just once. Further, RandOpt could be preferable where wall-clock time is what matters:
RandOpt’s wall-clock time is O(1) in optimization steps whereas sequential methods like ES are O(T). Due to
its decentralized nature, RandOpt may also be especially suitable for federated settings where data security or
privacy are paramount.
13
11
Limitations
Pretraining Might Be All You Need, But You Do Need Pretraining RandOpt is not suitable for training large
neural nets from scratch, and achieves negligible performance in this setting (e.g., see the dotted red line in Figure
8). It also struggles on small pretrained models, where the density of solutions is low. The success of RandOpt
around well-pretrained inits does not mean we should discard other learning algorithms. Rather RandOpt works
once you have a good enough representation, but to find that representation in the first place may still require
structured search.
Capacity to Learn Dramatically New Skills? Our results leave open the question of exactly how far beyond the
base model’s abilities random guessing and ensembling can take us. The scaling relationships we observe appear
to saturate at large model size (Figure 10) and large N (Figure 7); the saturation is visible even as a function of
log resources. This may indicate that further improvement on these tasks requires exiting the local thickets and
hunting farther and wider, where the search might return to needle-in-haystack dynamics and more structured
methods may be necessary.
Inference-Time Cost At inference time RandOpt uses K forward passes, and good performance typically requires
K > 1. This cost can be reduced by distilling the ensemble into a single model, as we have shown in Section
7. However, distilling introduces several tradeoffs: 1) the algorithm is no longer fully parallel, 2) distillation
requires additional training flops (although we found this cost to be minor in our experiments), and 3) our specific
distillation approach is tailored to LLM reasoning toward a categorical final prediction; this approach might not be
applicable in other settings.
Majority-Vote Ensembling Does Not Support Structured Prediction We have focused primarily on problems
where the answer is a single discrete class (or an integer), in which case majority-vote ensembling is straightforward
to apply. In the 1D signal experiments in Appendix F, we also show a case where mean ensembling can work.
It is less clear how to ensemble, or distill, models that perform more structured kinds of prediction, such as
writing a story, generating an image, designing a molecule, etc. To handle these cases, the ensembling approach
in Algorithm 1 would need to be modified. In Appendix J, we show one simple ensembling approach on image
generation with a diffusion model: mean ensembling at each step of denoising. We do not claim that this is the
best choice but rather include it as a proof of concept that our framework could be extended to many possible
ensembling methods beyond just majority voting.
Exactly When and Why Does Pretraining Enter the Thicket Regime? Our results characterize properties of the
pretrained landscape, but do not fully explain the mechanisms by which these properties arise. The experiments
in Section 3 show a setting in which pretraining on a distribution of many different tasks is critical to thickets
forming. Is this also the critical factor in developing thickets in LLMs and other large models? What exactly is it
about the pretraining objective, or learning dynamics, that creates thickets? Our results invite further investigation.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported under project ID 43 as part of the Swiss AI Initiative, through a grant from the ETH Domain and
computational resources provided by the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS) under the Alps infrastructure. This
work was also supported by a Packard Fellowship to P.I., and a Frederick (1953) and Barbara Cronin Fellowship to Y.G., and
by ONR MURI grant N00014-22-1-2740. We thank Minyoung Huh and Jeremy Bernstein for inspiring discussions on earlier
iterations of this project.
14
References
Aghajanyan, A., Zettlemoyer, L., and Gupta, S. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the effectiveness of language
model fine-tuning, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.13255.
Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M., Bosma, M., Michalewski, H., Dohan, D., Jiang, E., Cai, C., Terry, M., Le, Q.,
and Sutton, C. Program synthesis with large language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.
07732.
Baldwin, J. M. A new factor in evolution. The American Naturalist, 30(355):536–553, 1896.
Cherepkov, A., Voynov, A., and Babenko, A. Navigating the gan parameter space for semantic image editing. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3671–3680, 2021.
Choromanska, A., Henaff, M., Mathieu, M., Arous, G. B., and LeCun, Y. The loss surfaces of multilayer networks.
In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 192–204. PMLR, 2015.
Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano, R.,
et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Countdown.
Countdown (game show).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Countdown_(game_show),
2024. [Online; accessed 29-March-2024].
Dravid, A., Gandelsman, Y., Wang, K.-C., Abdal, R., Wetzstein, G., Efros, A., and Aberman, K. Interpreting the
weight space of customized diffusion models. NeurIPS, 2024.
Finn, C. and Levine, S. Meta-learning and universality: Deep representations and gradient descent can approximate
any learning algorithm, 2018.
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Frankle, J. and Carbin, M. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural networks. ICLR, 2019.
Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep
learning. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059. PMLR, 2016.
Gandhi, K., Lee, D., Grand, G., Liu, M., Cheng, W., Sharma, A., and Goodman, N. D. Stream of search (sos):
Learning to search in language, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03683.
Glorot, X. and Bengio, Y. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings
of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 249–256. JMLR Workshop and
Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Goan, E. and Fookes, C. Bayesian neural networks: An introduction and survey. In Case Studies in Applied Bayesian
Data Science: CIRM Jean-Morlet Chair, Fall 2018, pp. 45–87. Springer, 2020.
Grattafiori, A., Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., and et al., A. P. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2407.21783.
He, C., Luo, R., Bai, Y., Hu, S., Thai, Z., Shen, J., Hu, J., Han, X., Huang, Y., Zhang, Y., et al. Olympiadbench: A
challenging benchmark for promoting agi with olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific problems. In
Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
3828–3850, 2024.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on
imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Hinton, G. E., Nowlan, S. J., et al. How learning can guide evolution. Complex systems, 1(3):495–502, 1987.
Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., and Chen, W. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of
large language models. In ICLR, 2022.
15
Huang, G., Li, Y., Pleiss, G., Liu, Z., Hopcroft, J. E., and Weinberger, K. Q. Snapshot ensembles: Train 1, get m for
free. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00109, 2017.
Hudson, D. A. and Manning, C. D. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning and compositional question
answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6700–6709, 2019.
Jaderberg, M., Dalibard, V., Osindero, S., Czarnecki, W. M., Donahue, J., Razavi, A., Vinyals, O., Green, T., Dunning,
I., Simonyan, K., et al. Population based training of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.
Keskar, N. S., Mudigere, D., Nocedal, J., Smelyanskiy, M., and Tang, P. T. P. On large-batch training for deep
learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. ICLR, 2017.
Li, H., Xu, Z., Taylor, G., Studer, C., and Goldstein, T. Visualizing the loss landscape of neural nets. In Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Liang, Q., Song, J., Liu, Y., Gore, J., Fiete, I., Miikkulainen, R., and Qiu, X. The blessing of dimensionality in llm
fine-tuning: A variance-curvature perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.00170, 2026.
Ma, P., Du, T., and Matusik, W. Efficient continuous pareto exploration in multi-task learning. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6522–6531. PMLR, 2020.
Mania, H., Guy, A., and Recht, B. Simple random search provides a competitive approach to reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07055, 2018.
Mayilvahanan, P., Dominguez-Olmedo, R., Wiedemer, T., and Brendel, W. Math-beyond: A benchmark for rl to
expand beyond the base model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11653, 2025.
Mehrtash, A., Abolmaesumi, P., Golland, P., Kapur, T., Wassermann, D., and Wells, W. Pep: Parameter ensembling
by perturbation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:8895–8906, 2020.
Mirzadeh, S. I., Farajtabar, M., Gorur, D., Pascanu, R., and Ghasemzadeh, H. Linear mode connectivity in multitask
and continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04495, 2020.
Morris, J. X., Mireshghallah, N., Ibrahim, M., and Mahloujifar, S. Learning to reason in 13 parameters. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.04118, 2026.
Mostafazadeh, N., Chambers, N., He, X., Parikh, D., Batra, D., Vanderwende, L., Kohli, P., and Allen, J. A
corpus and evaluation framework for deeper understanding of commonsense stories, 2016. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1604.01696.
Mouret, J.-B. and Clune, J. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.
Narayanan, D., Shoeybi, M., Casper, J., LeGresley, P., Patwary, M., Korthikanti, V. A., Vainbrand, D., Kashinkunti,
P., Bernauer, J., Catanzaro, B., Phanishayee, A., and Zaharia, M. Efficient large-scale language model training on
gpu clusters using megatron-lm, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.04473.
Oller, D., Glasmachers, T., and Cuccu, G. Analyzing reinforcement learning benchmarks with random weight
guessing. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS
’20, pp. 975–982, Richland, SC, 2020. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
ISBN 9781450375184.
Olmo, T., :, Ettinger, A., Bertsch, A., Kuehl, B., Graham, D., and et al., D. H. Olmo 3, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2512.13961.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray,
A., et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
Park, K., Choe, Y. J., and Veitch, V. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry of large language
models. ICML, 2024.
16
Podell, D., English, Z., Lacey, K., Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., Müller, J., Penna, J., and Rombach, R. Sdxl:
Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2307.01952.
Qiu, X., Gan, Y., Hayes, C. F., Liang, Q., Meyerson, E., Hodjat, B., and Miikkulainen, R. Evolution strategies at
scale: Llm fine-tuning beyond reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24372, 2025.
Qwen, :, Yang, A., Yang, B., and et al., B. Z. Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2412.15115.
Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Manning, C. D., Ermon, S., and Finn, C. Direct preference optimization: Your
language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:53728–53741,
2023.
Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S., and Sutskever, I.
Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative to
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
Schmidhuber, J., Hochreiter, S., and Bengio, Y. Evaluating benchmark problems by random guessing. A Field Guide
to Dynamical Recurrent Networks, pp. 231–235, 2001.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Shao, R., Li, S. S., Xin, R., Geng, S., Wang, Y., Oh, S., Du, S. S., Lambert, N., Min, S., Krishna, R., Tsvetkov, Y.,
Hajishirzi, H., Koh, P. W., and Zettlemoyer, L. Spurious rewards: Rethinking training signals in rlvr, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10947.
Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Li, Y., Wu, Y., et al. Deepseekmath:
Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Sheng, G., Zhang, C., Ye, Z., Wu, X., Zhang, W., Zhang, R., Peng, Y., Lin, H., and Wu, C. Hybridflow: A flexible
and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256, 2024.
Simpson, G. G. The baldwin effect. Evolution, 7(2):110–117, 1953.
Team, M. EvalScope: Evaluation framework for large models, 2024. URL https://github.com/modelscope/
evalscope.
Tian, Y., Wang, Y., Krishnan, D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Isola, P. Rethinking few-shot image classification: a good
embedding is all you need? ECCV, 2020.
Tice, C., Kreer, P. A., Helm-Burger, N., Shahani, P. S., Ryzhenkov, F., Roger, F., Neo, C., Haimes, J., Hofstätter, F.,
and van der Weij, T. Noise injection reveals hidden capabilities of sandbagging language models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2025.
van der Lingen, R. Reaction smiles uspto year 2023, 12 2023. URL https://figshare.com/articles/
dataset/Reaction_SMILES_USPTO_year_2023/24921555.
Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q., Chi, E., Narang, S., Chowdhery, A., and Zhou, D. Self-consistency
improves chain of thought reasoning in language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171.
Wu, Y., Sun, Z., Li, S., Welleck, S., and Yang, Y. Inference scaling laws: An empirical analysis of compute-optimal
inference for llm problem solving. ICLR, 2025.
Xiong, W., Yao, J., Xu, Y., Pang, B., Wang, L., Sahoo, D., Li, J., Jiang, N., Zhang, T., Xiong, C., et al. A minimalist
approach to llm reasoning: from rejection sampling to reinforce. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11343, 2025.
Zelikman, E., Wu, Y., Mu, J., and Goodman, N. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:15476–15488, 2022.
17
A
Models
We conduct experiments across the Qwen, Llama, and OLMo3 model families. Our selection encompasses
diverse model sizes (0.5B to 8B parameters), multiple model families with different pretraining recipes, and both
instruction-tuned and base models. Specifically, we evaluate:
Qwen2.5-Instruct (Qwen et al., 2025) at three scales (0.5B, 1.5B, and 3B). Qwen2.5-Instruct is a series of instruction-
tuned language models ranging from 0.5B to 72B parameters, demonstrating strong performance on reasoning and
coding tasks.
Llama-3.1-8B Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024). This is an instruction-tuned variant of the Llama 3.1 family,
optimized for dialogue and instruction-following capabilities.
OLMo3 (Olmo et al., 2025) in both base and instruction-tuned variants at 7B. We include OLMo3 as it is fully
open-source with transparent training data and procedures, mitigating concerns about potential data contamination
or sandbagging that may affect evaluation integrity.
B
Datasets
We evaluate our method on benchmarks spanning five task categories: mathematical reasoning (Countdown,
GSM8K, OlympiadBench, MATH-500), code generation (MBPP), creative writing (CommonGen), chemistry
(USPTO) and commonsense (GQA), a visual question answering benchmark commonly evaluated with vision-
language models (VLMs).
Mathematical Reasoning. Countdown task (Countdown, 2024; Gandhi et al., 2024) measures symbolic and
numerical reasoning ability by requiring models to construct arithmetic expressions that exactly reach a target
value given a set of numbers.
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) is a widely used benchmark for grade-school–level mathematical reasoning,
consisting of multi-step word problems that require arithmetic calculations and logical reasoning.
OlympiadBench (He et al., 2024) is a bilingual benchmark consisting of 8,476 Olympiad-level mathematics and
physics problems drawn from international and Chinese competitions, designed to evaluate scientific reasoning
capabilities including theorem application, multi-step derivations, and complex problem solving.
MATH-500 (Mayilvahanan et al., 2025) is a challenging subset of the MATH dataset, focusing on competition-
level mathematical problems that test advanced multi-step reasoning and symbolic manipulation.
Code Generation. MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) is a benchmark of approximately 1,000 crowd-sourced Python
programming problems designed to be solvable by entry-level programmers. Each problem consists of a task
description, a reference code solution, and three automated test cases, covering programming fundamentals and
standard library functionality to evaluate function-level code generation capabilities.
Creative Writing. ROCStories (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016) is a commonsense narrative generation benchmark
consisting of short everyday stories. The dataset contains around 100,000 five-sentence narratives describing real-
world events. It evaluates a model’s ability to generate coherent, fluent, and logically consistent story continuations
grounded in commonsense reasoning.
Chemistry. USPTO (van der Lingen, 2023) is a large-scale chemical reaction dataset extracted from United
States Patent and Trademark Office patent documents, containing over 1.8 million organic chemical reactions
represented as reaction SMILES. The benchmark evaluates models on reaction prediction and retrosynthesis tasks,
requiring understanding of chemical transformations and molecular structure relationships.
Commonsense. GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019) is a visual question answering benchmark designed to
evaluate compositional visual reasoning and grounded commonsense understanding. Questions require models
to perform multi-step reasoning over object attributes and relations (e.g., spatial relationships, colors, or object
interactions), testing the ability to combine visual grounding with commonsense reasoning.
18
10
30
100
300
1K
3K
10K
30K
100K
Population Size N (%)
10
20
30
40
50
60
Accuracy (%)
K/N
1%
2%
5%
10%
20%
35%
50%
75%
100%
1
2
5
10
20
35 50
75100
Selection Ratio K/N (%)
N
10
30
100
300
1K
3K
10K
30K
100K
Figure 10: Scaling curves for population size K and ensemble size N on Countdown task.
Countdown
GSM8k
MATH-500
OlyBench
MBPP
ROCStories
USPTO
0
20
40
60
80
Accuracy (%)
6.7
58.8
43.2
13.4
62.3
46.7
30.2
27.5
72.1
54.1
18.8
70.2
53.6
31.8
44.2
71.7
54.1
27.2
69.9
60.2
32.0
23.5
67.9
48.5
20.4
68.0
48
31.5
52.7
76.4
59.7
30.4
69.6
48.5
34.3
(math)
(math)
(math)
(math)
(programming)
(writing)
(chemistry)
RandOpt(K=50)
RandOpt(K=1)
ES
GRPO
Base
Figure 11: Model performance comparison on Countdown, GSM8k, MATH-500, and OlympiadBench using the Qwen2.5-1.5B-
Instruct model. More results for additional models and baselines can be found in Appendix Table 4.
C
Baseline Methods
Test-Time Majority Vote. Majority voting (Wang et al., 2023) is a test-time inference strategy that samples multiple
independent responses from a model and selects the most frequently occurring answer. This approach improves
accuracy without updating model parameters by leveraging the diversity of sampled reasoning paths.
Best-of-N. Best-of-N (Ouyang et al., 2022) samples multiple responses at inference time and selects the highest-
scoring one according to a predefined evaluation metric or reward function, rather than aggregating answers by
frequency as in majority voting.
PPO. Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017) uses a clipped surrogate objective to stabilize policy
updates in RLHF, requiring both a policy model and a critic network.
GRPO. Group Relative Policy Optimization (Shao et al., 2024) removes the critic by computing advantages from
group-level reward statistics, reducing memory overhead compared to PPO.
ES. Evolution Strategies at Scale (Qiu et al., 2025) perform gradient-free optimization by perturbing parameters
with Gaussian noise and updating based on fitness-weighted perturbations.
D
Additional Experimental Analysis
Full results on LLM For post-training LLMs, Table 4 reports our full results across different base models,
adaptation methods, and tasks.
Effect of ensembling Figure 11 compares RandOpt (K=1) to RandOpt (K=50), alongside several baselines. These
results show that ensembling over many perturbations is critical to getting competitive performance on most
tasks, but also that even without ensembling (just taking the top perturbation; K=1), we observe a substantial
19
performance boost over the base model.
70%
80%
90%
100%
110%
120%
Relative Performance (vs Base Model)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Count
GSM8K
Good solution: 
100% base perf.
0.5B  good solution: 0%
1.5B  good solution: 18%
3B    good solution: 37%
32B   good solution: 64%
0%
50%
100%
150%
200%
Relative Performance (vs Base Model)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Countdown
Good solution: 
100% base perf.
0.5B  good solution: 8%
1.5B  good solution: 48%
3B    good solution: 54%
32B   good solution: 60%
Figure 12: Performance distributions of 500 randomly perturbed models relative to base model accuracy on the math reasoning
task GSM8k (left) and Countdown (right). The fraction of perturbations matching or exceeding base performance (shaded
region) increases with model size: 0% →64% on GSM8K and 8% →60% on Countdown as model size grows from 0.5B to 32B
parameters. Note: x-axis shows relative performance; longer tails in smaller models do not equate to higher absolute accuracy.
Solution density histograms In Figure 12, we show the full distribution of performance improvement over
random weight perturbations for GSM8K and Countdown, on the Qwen2.5-Instruct series of models.
Log-linear correlation between population size (N) and performance. Appendix Figure 10 illustrates the scaling
properties of our method on the Countdown task. As shown in the left panel, we observe a log-linear correlation
between population size and performance across different selection ratios. RandOpt benefits significantly from
scaling N in the population size.
Selection ratio saturation. The right panel shows that while increasing the selection ratio significantly improves
performance when N is small, this benefit saturates as N scales up. For sufficiently large N, the minimal value of
K (selecting only the top 1%) yields high performance. This demonstrates that a large population size N allows for
a very small topK selection, which can reduce inference time costs.
103
104
Batch/Group Size (RandOpt: N)
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
Accuracy (%)
RandOpt
GRPO  1e{ 5, 6, 7}
PPO   1e{ 5, 6, 7}
Figure 13: Batch/group size vs.
accuracy under one-step
training. Scaling baseline parallelism does not get RandOpt’s
performance.
Task: GSM8K, Model: Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct,
N=5000, K=50)
Scaling Parallelism of the Baselines Does Not Match
RandOpt (1-Step Training). Figure 13 plots batch/-
group size versus accuracy on GSM8K using Qwen2.5-
3B-Instruct, with all methods run for one training step.
The key takeaway is that using larger batch/group size
does not really help. We grid-search GRPO and PPO
on 8 GPUs over learning rates 1e −5, 1e −6, and 1e −7;
batch size (PPO) ranges from 128 to 2048, and group
size (GRPO) ranges from 512 to 8192.
The x-axis is
batch/group size (RandOpt uses population size N),
color encodes learning rate, and marker shape denotes
algorithm.
PPO does not benefit consistently from larger batches:
best accuracy is 78.0% at batch size 256 (lr=1e −5), while
larger-batch runs such as batch size 2048 reach at most
77.5%.
GRPO reaches its peak at 83.5% (group size=512 × 4,
lr=1e −5), but increasing group size does not improve
performance (e.g., 80.1% at 2048 × 4 with lr=1e −5).
RandOpt (N = 3000) reaches 87.1%, exceeding all GRPO
and PPO settings. This indicates that scaling baseline
parallelism does not close the gap with RandOpt ’s per-
formance.
20
E
Implementation Details
All experiments are conducted on NVIDIA GH200 GPUs.
To ensure a fair comparison, we normalize the
computational budgets of all methods by the total training FLOPs. For the experiments in Table 4, We have two
variants that differ in their selection strategy: RandOpt (random) performs selection by random sampling, while
RandOpt (ES) updates the population using an evolution strategies (ES) algorithm and selects the top-50 models
from the final ES population. We use a population size of 5,000 and ensemble the top-50 models for RandOpt
(random), and a population size of 100 with 50 iterations and ensemble the top-50 models for RandOpt (ES). For
the figures in Section 2, we use σ = 0.005. For all datasets, we use the first 200 samples from the training set as
the RandOpt training set, and all samples from the test set for evaluation. For MATH-500, we manually split the
dataset: the first 200 samples are used for training and the remaining samples for testing. For OlympiadBench, we
use the text-only English competition math subset (OE_TO_maths_en_COMP.parquet), since most other subsets
require visual inputs.
E.1
FLOPs Calculation
For a model with P parameters and a sequence length of L, we follow the standard estimation where a single
forward pass requires approximately 2PL FLOPs, and a backward pass requires 4PL FLOPs (Narayanan et al.,
2021). The total training compute is determined by the number of samples processed and the computational
overhead per sample.
E.2
Method-Specific Compute
• GRPO: Each step processes a batch of B questions with G responses per question. Each response involves a
policy forward, a reference model forward, and a policy backward pass.
FLOPsGRPO = TGRPO · B · G · (2 + 2 + 4)
|
{z
}
fwd + ref + bwd
·PL = 8 · TGRPO · B · G · PL
(7)
• PPO: Adds critic forward and backward passes to the GRPO baseline.
FLOPsPPO = TPPO · B · G ·
(2 + 2 + 2 + 4 + 4)
|
{z
}
fwd + ref + crit_fwd + bwd + crit_bwd
·PL = 14 · TPPO · B · G · PL
(8)
• ES & RandOpt: These gradient-free methods only require forward passes for evaluation. For a population
size N and evaluation dataset size D:
FLOPsES/RandOpt = TES · N · D ·
2
|{z}
fwd
·PL = 2 · TES · N · D · PL
(9)
E.3
Hyperparameters
Appendix Table 3 shows the hyperparemeters across methods.
To ensure a fair comparison, we align the
hyperparameters such that all methods consume equivalent total training FLOPs. We balance the batch size and
iteration counts to account for algorithmic overheads. For instance, GRPO uses a larger batch size (B = 1024)
compared to PPO (B = 128) due to the latter’s additional memory cost for the critic network. Similarly, we match
the total number of sample evaluations between the iterative ES (30 population × 167 steps) and the single-step
RandOpt (5000 population × 1 step). All experiments utilize bfloat16 precision with a maximum sequence length
of 1024.
F
Additional Results on 1D Signals
We show additional results of the experiments on 1D signals in Tables 5 and 6. Table 5 tests the approximation
ability of RandOpt: here we select perturbations based on their ability to fit a single test function (plotted in blue).
21
Table 3: Hyperparameters. ’–’ indicates that the hyperparameter is not required for the corresponding algorithm.
Category
Parameter
GRPO
PPO
ES
RandOpt
Budget
& Scale
Batch Size
1024
128
–
–
Group/Population Size
8
1
30
5000
Iterations
200
600
167
1
Optimization
Complexity
Actor Learning Rate
1e-6
1e-6
5e-4 (α)
–
Critic Learning Rate
–
1e-5
–
–
Optimizer
AdamW
AdamW
-
–
KL Coefficient (β)
0.001
0.001
–
–
Backpropagation
Yes
Yes
–
–
Model
Requirements
Reference Model
Required
Required
–
–
Critic Model
–
Required
–
–
Value Head
–
Required
–
–
Other
Hyperparams
Perturbation Scale (σ)
–
–
0.001
{1, 2, 3}e-3
Precision
bf16
bf16
bf16
bf16
Max Seq. Length
1024
1024
1024
1024
Table 6 instead tests generalization: we select the top-K perturbations that perform best on a post-training dataset,
then plot predictions on a newly sampled test function of the same function type as the post-training type (noted
in the second column). In this table, we also include mean performance over 256 randomly sampled test functions
of the same type (rightmost column).
All three of the regimes we have discussed in the main paper can be observed here:
1) Needle in haystack regime: Without pretraining (Table 5, top two rows), the Gaussian perturbations do not
sample effective models. We show this for two different weight initializations: Xavier initialization (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010) and Kaiming initialization (He et al., 2015). In both cases, we need to ramp up the σ value of the
perturbations to see any visible effect. Nonetheless, even with large engough σ to see interesting variation in the
predictions, the variation does not contain good continuations of the test functions.
2) Thicket regime: With pretraining on mixed signal types (Table 5, row 3, Table 6 rows 1-3), the base model fails
to reliably predict the correct type given a limited context; after RandOpt post-training on this type, the results
improve.
3) Plateau regime: If you pretrain on just a single function type and test on this type (Table 5 bottom row,
left column; Table 6 rows 4-5), then the base model already is at ceiling performance and further adaptation is
unnecessary.
G
Additional discussion on Sandbagging
In this section, we provide a more detailed discussion on why we think the performance improvements of RandOpt
cannot be attributed to the alleviation of “sandbagging.” Sandbagging refers to a phenomenon where a model
underperforms relative to its true underlying capabilities, perhaps as a side-effect of safety alignment or instruction
tuning that penalizes certain types of outputs. A potential concern is that if the baseline model’s performance
is artificially suppressed by such alignment, any perturbation might simply bypass these constraints to reveal
pre-existing latent performance.
Evidence from Transparent Base Models. The strongest evidence against the sandbagging hypothesis comes from
our results on the OLMo3-7B Base model. Unlike many proprietary models whose training recipes are unknown,
OLMo’s training data, code, and training pipeline are open-source. This transparency allows us to verify that the
base model is not subject to explicit sandbagging. As shown in Table 4, RandOpt is still quite effective on this
22
model.
Inconsistency with Strategic Behavior in Small Models. Sandbagging is generally considered a property of
larger models. However, RandOpt yields consistent gains across all scales. For instance, on the Qwen2.5-0.5B-Inst
model, RandOpt improves GSM8k performance from 39.9% (Base) to 61.2%.
Comparison with Test-Time Majority Voting (TT-MV). If the models were simply sandbagging by occasionally
providing wrong answers despite “knowing” the correct ones, test-time techniques like Majority Voting (TT-
MV) might effectively recover that latent performance. Our experimental results in Table 4 show that RandOpt
consistently outperforms TT-MV across most benchmarks.
H
Derivation of Spectral Discordance Bounds
Here we provide the formal proof for the theoretical bounds of the Spectral Discordance metric D defined in the
main text.
Proposition H.1. For any valid correlation matrix C ∈RM×M, the Spectral Discordance D = 1 −
1
M(M−1) ∑j̸=k Cjk is
bounded by:
0 ≤D ≤
M
M −1
(10)
Proof. Let ¯ρ denote the average off-diagonal correlation:
¯ρ =
1
M(M −1) ∑
j̸=k
Cjk
(11)
By definition, D = 1 −¯ρ. We analyze the bounds of ¯ρ.
1. Lower Bound of D (Upper Bound of ¯ρ): The maximum value of any correlation coefficient is 1. If all tasks
are perfectly correlated (Cjk = 1, ∀j, k), then ¯ρ = 1, yielding the minimum discordance:
Dmin = 1 −1 = 0
(12)
This corresponds to the Generalist regime where all tasks ranks are identical.
2. Upper Bound of D (Lower Bound of ¯ρ): The correlation matrix C must be positive semi-definite (PSD).
Consider the quadratic form with the all-ones vector 1 ∈RM:
1⊤C1 ≥0
(13)
Expanding this quadratic form:
M
∑
i=1
M
∑
j=1
Cij =
M
∑
i=1
Cii + ∑
j̸=k
Cjk ≥0
(14)
Since diagonal elements Cii = 1:
M + M(M −1) ¯ρ ≥0
(15)
Solving for ¯ρ:
¯ρ ≥−
1
M −1
(16)
Substituting this into the definition of D:
Dmax = 1 −

−
1
M −1

= 1 +
1
M −1 =
M
M −1
(17)
This upper bound is achieved when the tasks are maximally anti-correlated (simplex structure). In our experiments
(M = 7), the theoretical maximum is D ≈1.17.
23
I
Prompts
We set up the prompts for different datasets in our experiments following EvalScope (Team, 2024) and Verl (Sheng
et al., 2024).
Countdown
User Template:
Using the numbers {numbers}, create an equation that equals {target}. You can use basic arithmetic opera-
tions (+, -, *, /) and each number can only be used once. Show your work in <work> . . . </work> tags. And re-
turn the final answer in <answer> . . . </answer> tags, for example <answer> (1 + 2) / 3 </answer>.
GSM8k, Math-500, OlympiadBench
User Template:
{question}. Let’s think step by step and output the final answer after ####.
MBPP
User Template:
You are an expert Python programmer, and here is your task: {question} Your code should pass these tests:
{tests}
USPTO-50k
User Template: You are an expert organic chemist. Your task is to classify chemical reactions into one
of 10 standard reaction categories based on the transformation type. Reaction Classes: 1: Heteroatom
alkylation/arylation - N, O, S attacking C (e.g., SN2, ether formation).
2: Acylation - Forming C=O bonds with N, O, S (e.g., amide, ester formation).
3: C-C bond formation - New C-C bonds (e.g., Suzuki, Heck, Grignard).
4: Heterocycle formation - Creating rings with N, O, S.
5: Protections - Adding protecting groups (Boc, Bn, TBS, etc.).
6: Deprotections - Removing protecting groups.
7: Reductions - Adding H, removing O (e.g., ketone→alcohol, nitro→amine)
8: Oxidations - Adding O, removing H (e.g., alcohol→ketone).
9: Functional group interconversion - Changing one FG to another.
10: Functional group addition - Adding new FG to molecule (e.g., halogenation)"
Classify this reaction: Reactants » Product: {rxn_smiles} Analyze the key transformation and output the
class number (1-10) in <answer>X</answer> tags.
ROCStories
User Template: Below are 5 sentences from a story, but they are in the wrong order. Please arrange them in
the correct chronological order.
Title: {title}
Sentence A: {sentence1} Sentence B: {sentence2} Sentence C: {sentence3} Sentence D: {sentence4}
Sentence E: {sentence5}
Output the correct order as comma-separated letters (e.g., B,A,D,E,C). Only output the letters, nothing else.
GQA
User Template:
Look at the image and answer the question.
24
Question: {question}
Please reason step by step, and put your final answer within boxed{}.
J
Color thickets
Beyond language models, we observe similar effects in diffusion models. Here, one can think of “color thickets,”
where certain regions of parameter space preferentially generate images with specific color palettes or visual styles.
These differences may not reflect fundamentally distinct generative mechanisms, yet they still produce dense
clusters of high-scoring samples under color- or style-sensitive metrics.
For instance, if the evaluation rewards blue-dominant images, a region that consistently generates bluish
outputs forms a “blue thicket.” More generally, thickets may arise not only from differences in reasoning, but also
from biases in generative tendencies such as color, texture, or style.
25
Table 4: Experimental results on reasoning benchmarks. We compare RandOpt against RL-based methods (PPO, GRPO),
Evolution Strategies (ES), Best-of-N and test-time majority voting (TT-MV) across model scales. Results are averaged over 3
runs with standard deviation shown in gray. Bold indicates best performance, underlined indicates runner-up. Details of the
hyperparameters for all methods are provided in Appendix E.3.
Model
Method
Countdown
GSM8k
MATH-500
OlyBench
MBPP
ROCStories
USPTO
(math) ↑
(math) ↑
(math) ↑
(math) ↑
(prog.) ↑
(writing) ↑
(chemistry) ↑
Qwen2.5-
0.5B-Inst
Base
0.1±0.1
39.9±0.0
19.8±0.0
4.2±0.4
30.9±0.2
22.0±0.0
29.9±0.3
TT-MV†
0.3±0.3
41.0±0.1
29.2±0.5
6.7±0.2
37.0±0.3
19.5±0.2
30.2±0.2
Best-of-N‡
5.9±2.0
40.5±1.4
34.5±0.5
10.5±0.3
34.9±1.3
20.3±0.3
26.8±1.2
PPO
14.8±2.8
43.2±1.2
33.4±1.7
16.1±0.0
37.8±3.0
19.1±0.8
31.2±0.6
GRPO
13.0±0.0
48.4±0.8
33.7±0.9
6.9±0.1
42.8±3.7
30.9±1.1
31.7±0.2
ES
14.9±1.6
42.6±0.7
30.5±0.7
16.4±0.2
45.1±3.8
32.0±0.8
31.6±0.3
RandOpt
8.4±0.3
54.1±0.8
35.3±0.6
15.8±0.7
46.2±0.4
32.2±0.4
32.2±0.9
ES + TT-MV
11.2±0.8
61.2±0.5
41.3±0.5
13.5±0.7
48.9±0.7
30.5±0.9
32.5±0.4
Qwen2.5-
1.5B-Inst
Base
6.7±0.1
58.8±0.2
43.2±0.1
13.4±0.4
62.3±0.2
46.7±0.1
30.2±0.5
TT-MV†
30.8±0.4
69.1±0.3
50.0±0.4
15.9±0.5
68.0±0.3
43.5±0.5
33.0±0.4
Best-of-N‡
19.5±0.2
65.4±1.9
53.0±0.6
20.0±0.3
69.5±0.3
42.2±0.8
32.7±1.1
PPO
27.0±0.0
71.6±0.7
55.9±0.3
26.3±0.1
68.5±0.4
51.8±0.8
31.9±0.2
GRPO
27.5±0.7
72.1±0.7
54.1±0.5
18.8±0.8
70.2±0.4
53.6±1.3
31.8±0.0
ES
44.2±0.0
71.7±0.9
54.1±2.8
27.2±1.2
69.9±0.6
60.2±0.6
32.0±0.2
RandOpt
52.7±0.5
76.4±0.3
59.7±0.6
30.4±0.7
69.6±0.5
48.5±0.7
34.3±0.5
ES + TT-MV
39.7±0.3
80.4±0.8
60.7±0.7
28.9±0.7
70.2±0.6
59.1±0.2
32.2±0.6
Qwen2.5-
3B-Inst
Base
10.0±0.1
79.8±0.4
58.6±0.2
24.5±0.2
69.5±0.3
54.7±0.1
38.5±0.5
TT-MV†
12.8±0.4
82.5±0.2
60.8±0.2
21.8±0.3
74.5±0.5
57.3±0.4
43.2±0.7
Best-of-N‡
28.5±1.2
83.3±1.4
62.5±0.8
28.0±0.6
73.0±0.9
55.0±0.7
44.3±1.0
PPO
35.3±0.4
83.1±0.2
64.1±1.1
34.4±0.2
76.3±1.0
49.0±0.6
44.7±5.8
GRPO
32.6±0.1
83.2±0.2
64.6±1.0
29.0±0.0
77.0±0.9
56.3±4.4
49.7±2.1
ES
55.6±0.5
85.8±5.1
61.9±0.3
36.4±0.1
77.2±1.2
64.5±0.6
52.9±1.0
RandOpt
58.4±0.2
87.1±0.8
68.7±0.7
39.2±0.6
75.9±0.6
56.5±0.3
42.3±0.3
ES + TT-MV
61.9±0.8
87.9±0.9
67.7±0.7
39.7±0.4
76.3±1.1
55.0±0.4
39.8±0.3
OLMo3-
7B-Inst
Base
64.8±0.2
82.9±0.4
60.6±0.1
28.7±0.1
65.9±0.2
64.0±0.3
27.2±0.4
TT-MV†
66.8±0.3
81.4±0.4
61.5±0.5
26.5±0.4
60.5±0.5
63.2±0.4
30.2±0.5
Best-of-N‡
67.5±0.8
85.0±1.2
63.0±0.7
30.5±0.5
64.0±0.9
63.5±0.6
32.0±1.0
PPO
69.0±0.1
88.4±0.4
63.1±0.3
28.0±0.2
67.7±0.2
64.7±1.6
40.2±3.2
GRPO
68.5±0.7
87.0±0.2
63.5±0.4
27.9±0.6
70.8±2.2
65.8±0.6
51.0±0.3
ES
71.0±0.8
87.2±0.2
69.9±1.0
33.1 ±0.8
72.0±0.5
65.7±1.4
45.2±1.0
RandOpt
85.0±0.7
89.5±0.2
73.7±0.4
35.4±0.4
75.1±0.9
64.5±0.3
43.0±0.5
ES + TT-MV
75.6±0.7
90.2±0.6
62.0 ±1.1
44.7±0.3
72.5±0.6
66.0±0.8
46.3±0.6
OLMo3-
7B
Base
9.8±0.4
78.5±0.4
31.3±0.3
13.9±0.3
29.1±0.3
24.1±0.1
29.0±0.3
TT-MV†
11.5±0.3
79.5±0.2
36.2±0.2
15.7±0.2
39.1±0.3
42.2±0.2
35.4±0.2
Best-of-N‡
18.0±0.5
82.0±1.0
45.0±0.8
20.5±0.4
38.0±1.2
50.0±0.8
38.0±0.9
PPO
21.9±0.7
82.8±0.9
51.8±0.7
22.9±0.5
57.9±2.0
64.8±0.3
49.8±0.3
GRPO
28.8±0.1
78.2±0.3
52.0±0.9
6.9±0.6
58.5±2.8
62.2±2.8
48.0±0.5
ES
26.0±0.3
89.1±0.6
61.0±4.9
30.2±0.4
61.8±2.3
64.4±1.0
48.1±1.5
RandOpt
30.2±0.2
85.0±0.3
59.3±0.5
28.9±0.5
40.5±0.2
64.5±0.3
44.3±0.3
ES + TT-MV
23.6±0.2
86.4±0.5
69.0±0.5
43.3±0.2
56.8±0.6
76.3±0.6
38.1±0.8
Llama3.1-
8B-Inst
Base
10.8±0.2
79.8±0.3
47.0±0.0
19.2±0.3
56.4±0.0
51.8±0.0
19.5±0.3
TT-MV†
25.6±0.3
72.2±0.4
49.2±0.3
24.5±0.5
59.5±0.4
53.2±0.4
25.4±0.2
Best-of-N‡
40.0±1.0
83.5±1.2
52.0±0.9
23.0±0.6
60.0±1.0
54.0±0.8
28.0±1.1
PPO
9.9±0.1
81.6±4.7
45.5±2.0
16.1±0.6
55.2±1.5
57.8±1.3
32.9±4.6
GRPO
10.0±0.2
80.2±1.1
45.1±1.4
23.7±0.9
61.0±1.9
62.2±2.8
35.0±0.7
ES
60.3±0.5
82.4±0.7
39.1±1.7
22.3±0.5
64.8±0.8
68.1±5.5
34.1±2.0
RandOpt
63.6±0.4
86.7±0.6
59.5±0.8
32.1±0.0
65.2±0.9
59.0±0.7
41.0±0.6
ES + TT-MV
62.5±0.9
87.5±0.6
62.0±0.7
32.1±0.5
63.1±0.8
65.2±0.7
64.5±0.7
†TT-MV: Test-Time Majority Vote over test samples from a single trained model with different seeds.
‡Best-of-N: Pass@k metric with k=50.
26
Table 5: RandOpt on 1D signals (approximation). Each cell corresponds to a pretraining–post-training pair. In this experiment
we plot results on the same function that we fit to during post-training; this is a test of apprpoximation only, not generalization
to new functions. We also compare to Xavier initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010) and Kaiming initialization He et al. (2015).
For each pretraining method, we pick a perturbation noise scale, σ that is large enough to show functional variation; this value
is shown underneath the pretraining method name.
Pretraining
Post-training
One linear function
One square wave
One sinusoid
None (Xavier init)
σ = 0.05
None (Kaiming init)
σ = 0.05
Mixed
σ = 0.002
Linear
σ = 0.002
27
Table 6: RandOpt on 1D signals (generalization). Each row corresponds to a pretraining–post-training pair. For all rows, the
test set functions are of the post-trained type, and we show three random test examples. Rightmost column shows the average
mean squared error over the entire test set, for each method.
Pretraining
Post-training
Test set predictions
Test set performance
(three examples)
Mixed
Linear
Mixed
Square waves
Mixed
Sinusoids
Sinusoids
Square waves
Square waves
Square waves
28
Table 7: RandOpt on Text-to-Image models (Train Set). We use the Stable Diffusion XL model (Podell et al., 2023). Images are
generated from a text prompt. RandOpt selects the top-K models by scoring generated images with a target text (e.g., “blue”)
using GPT-5.2, and performs mean ensembling over the K models at each denoising step.
A corgi astronaut, full body,
centered. . .
Kyoto street in the rain,
pedestrians with
umbrellas. . .
Boston skyline at sunset,
Charles River in foreground
A bowl of ramen with steam
rising, chopsticks lifting. . .
A glass of iced coffee on a
wooden table by a
window. . .
Base
Target text: Blue
Top1
Ensemble
Random#1
Target text: Yellow
Top1
Ensemble
Random#2
29
Table 8: RandOpt on Text-to-Image models (Test Set). Top-K selected on the training set and evaluated on the test set.
A dog on Mars, red rocky
landscape, astronaut
helmet. . .
A giant octopus emerging
from the ocean near. . .
A sailboat cutting through
choppy ocean waves
under. . .
A vintage motorcycle parked
beside a brick wall. . .
A busy Tokyo subway
platform during rush hour,
commuters. . .
Base
Target text: Blue
Top1
Ensemble
Random#1
Target text: Yellow
Top1
Ensemble
Random#2
30
