WORKSWORLD: A Domain for Integrated Numeric Planning and Scheduling of
Distributed Pipelined Workflows
Taylor Paul1, William Regli1
1University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA
thpaul@umd.edu, regli@umd.edu
Abstract
This work pursues automated planning and scheduling of
distributed data pipelines, or workflows. We develop a gen-
eral workflow and resource graph representation that includes
both data processing and sharing components with corre-
sponding network interfaces for scheduling. Leveraging these
graphs, we introduce WORKSWORLD, a new domain for
numeric domain-independent planners designed for perma-
nently scheduled workflows, like ingest pipelines. Our frame-
work permits users to define data sources, available workflow
components, and desired data destinations and formats with-
out explicitly declaring the entire workflow graph as a goal.
The planner solves a joint planning and scheduling problem,
producing a plan that both builds the workflow graph and
schedules its components on the resource graph. We empir-
ically show that a state-of-the-art numeric planner running on
commodity hardware with one hour of CPU time and 30 GB
of memory can solve linear-chain workflows of up to 14 com-
ponents across eight sites.
Domain —
https://github.com/taylorpaul/WORKSWORLD
Benchmarks —
https://gitlab.com/thpaul/worksworld-benchmarks/
Data — https://gitlab.com/thpaul/worksworld-
benchmarks/-/jobs/13325198684/artifacts/download
1
Introduction
Spending billions of dollars on data platforms and artificial
intelligence (AI), most organizations struggle to see any tan-
gible return on investment (ROI) (Challapally et al. 2025).
Why? Today’s platforms and algorithms deliver little value
without unfettered access to collected, curated, and current
data (Heck 2024) from the distributed systems that support
daily operations. Establishing effective data pipelines, or
data-intensive workflows (hereafter, workflows), persists as
a prerequisite to productive employment of AI tools. Such
workflows must process diverse data sources into required
formats and feed them into multiple systems and mod-
els without excessive cost or prohibitive latency. Optimally
planning and scheduling such workflows, especially those
sufficiently complex to meet real-world use cases, most of-
ten proves computationally intractable (Versluis and Iosup
2021; Ghallab et al. 1998).
YAML to PDDL
Converter
YAML Generator
(environment & goal)
Problem
PDDL
Domain
PDDL
Existing Numeric
Planner(s)
Validate
Output Plan
Visualization
(initial state + result)
YAML Config
(environment & goal)
Data Engineer
General
Formulation
Figure 1: The WORKSWORLD framework. Primary research
contributions are green; secondary engineering artifacts pro-
vided without experimental evaluation are yellow.
Diverse communities have long pursued efficient place-
ment of computational tasks on distributed heterogeneous
resources: high-performance computing (HPC) (Da Silva
et al. 2024), distributed computing (Dustdar, Pujol, and
Donta 2023), and machine learning (Kreuzberger, K¨uhl,
and Hirschl 2023). These communities share a core prob-
lem, yet bring distinct perspectives, objectives, and assump-
tions that shape both tractability and real-world applicabil-
ity of solutions. Prior work typically begins with a fully-
formed workflow—a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of com-
putational tasks connected by data dependency edges—and
solves a scheduling problem to place tasks on compute re-
sources while optimizing one or two metrics (e.g., latency,
throughput, or cost) (Vivas, Tchernykh, and Castro 2024).
We jointly plan and schedule a DAG of both processing
and data components, explicitly decoupling compute, stor-
age, and network decisions.
Data-intensive workflows have received increased at-
tention over the past decade (Suter et al. 2023; Heck
2024), inspiring new organizational approaches (e.g. data
mesh (Goedegebuure et al. 2024)) and roles (e.g. data en-
gineers). Complexity in planning these workflows increases
when data producers (sources) and consumers (sinks) span
multiple networks or sites, especially when consumers re-
quire the same source data in different formats. A data engi-
neer must decide which data conversions to apply, whether
to process data centrally (i.e. the cloud) or simultaneously
at multiple sites, and how to place processing tasks across
arXiv:2603.12214v1  [cs.DC]  12 Mar 2026
available compute resources while meeting capacity and in-
teroperability constraints. This complexity, combined with
the workflow graph’s direct impact on performance and
cost, makes such workflows strong candidates for joint plan-
ning and scheduling approaches (Long, Dolejsi, and Stolba
2023).
To aid data engineers in their work, we develop the
framework depicted in Figure 1 that permits them to de-
fine the problem environment, workflow components, and
goals (output data formats and locations) as a YAML Ain’t
Markup Language (YAML) configuration file. Our frame-
work converts the YAML to a Planning Domain Definition
Language (PDDL) problem and solves a numeric planning
problem using existing numeric planners and a new PDDL
domain we call WORKSWORLD. We validate the output
plan1 (Howey, Long, and Fox 2004) and provide a simple
visualization tool depicting both the provided initial state
and result of executing the plan. In contrast, existing solu-
tions are largely proprietary and platform-specific (Amado
et al. 2025; Sohrabi et al. 2013). To our knowledge, no pub-
licly available system addresses our exact problem formula-
tion. Thus, we demonstrate viability through scalability re-
sults rather than a competitive baseline comparison. We find
that a state-of-the-art (SOA) numeric planner, the Expres-
sive Numeric Heuristic Search Planner (ENHSP), can plan
and schedule satisficing workflows of seven processing and
seven data components across eight sites with reasonable
CPU time (one hour) and memory (30 GB) on commodity
hardware.
2
Problem and Motivation
Depicted in Figure 2, we seek to map pipelined workflows
(see Definition 1) permanently, until deprovisioned, to com-
pute and storage resources across distributed cloud, fog, and
edge sites (see Section 3). We do not require the entire work-
flow graph as input and thus solve an integrated planning and
scheduling problem. We seek satisficing mappings of work-
flows to site resources that minimize compute, storage and
network costs while constraining latency.
Motivating Workflow Examples
We present three workflows spanning distinct cost-latency
tradeoff regimes to illustrate the value of decoupling pro-
cessing, data placement, and routing.
1. Archival Workflow: Digital media archiving (Hou et al.
2006). Records from three distributed sites must be en-
coded, compressed, and stored at a central cloud site
(hours tolerable). Tradeoff: compress at source (less
transfer cost) or centrally to consolidate compute?
2. Sensor Workflow: Wildfire detection (Altintas et al.
2022). Edge sensors generate raw data requiring pre-
processing before algorithm inference to detect smoke
and trigger simulations (minutes tolerable before human
review). Tradeoff: transfer raw data to the cloud, or move
pre-processing and inference to edge sites?
1https://github.com/KCL-Planning/VAL
3. Automation Workflow: Cybersecurity. Firewall events un-
dergo normalization and anomaly detection to trigger
automatic IP blocking (sub-second latency required).
Tradeoff: meeting strict latency bounds while placing
compute and data to minimize cost.
These workflows span the cost-latency tradeoff space rel-
evant to our research: workflow purpose drives latency tol-
erance, while data volume and compute placement decisions
drive cost. They motivate our research and guide our exper-
imental setup in Section 5.
Clean
Analytic
(ML)
Analytic
(Count)
Fixed Data
Input/Output
Movable
Components
Tasks
or 
Steps
Source
Sink
Data 
Flow
  Latency  
 Network
Cost
Fog
Compute
&
Storage
Edge
Compute
&
Storage
WAN
WAN
Bandwidth
Latency
Cloud
Compute
&
Storage
WAN
Compute
and
Storage
Cost
Figure 2: Our scheduling problem consists of mapping mov-
able components in the left-hand DAG to utilize compute,
storage and network resources across sites.
3
Background
Now we lay down a foundation, built by others, on which
our contribution rests. We briefly define the computing envi-
ronment in which we plan, scope our workflow scheduling
problem, and provide the required AI planning prerequisites.
Compute Environment
The distributed computing research community provide
abstractions to describe the computing environment they
study. The early 2000’s saw a heavy focus on Grid Com-
puting (Foster, Kesselman, and Tuecke 2001) before cloud-
computing (Mell and Grance 2011) stole much of the com-
munity’s focus. When latency sensitive workflows did not
fit the cloud only approach, the Cloud-Compute Contin-
uum (Moreschini et al. 2022) emerged to define three gen-
eral categories of compute resources: cloud, fog and edge
which we leverage in describing different sites and their
compute, storage and network resources.
Pipelined Workflows Scheduling
Scheduling compute tasks across available resources proves
an incredibly broad topic studied by multiple communities
across many decades (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004,
Ch. 15). There is no best scheduling approach in general to
workflows due to the NP-hardness of the problem and the in-
fluence of specific scheduling context on the time and space
required for finding acceptable solutions (Versluis and Iosup
2021). We find a scoping to pipelined workflows scheduling
clarifying in terms of our context; see Definition 1.
Definition 1 (Pipelined Workflow Scheduling). Pipelined
workflow scheduling encompasses executing the same
workflow on varying datasets of identical size across paral-
lel machines utilizing task, data, pipelined and/or replicated
parallelism. (Benoit et al. 2013)
In our setting, the datasets are individual or groups of
source data messages aggregated at our input data compo-
nents. Benoit et al. 2013 provide a survey and taxonomy
to classify pipelined workflow scheduling characteristics
and specify complexity for scheduling linear task graphs.
With their taxonomy, we classify our problem as schedul-
ing pipelined workflows across related-heterogenous com-
pute and storage resources at distributed sites connected
by structured-heterogenous, bandwidth bounded, network
links. We employ a multi-objective performance model that
minimizes resource utilization (i.e. cost) while constraining
latency (corresponding to makespan in single dataset DAG
scheduling). However, our permanent scheduling of compo-
nents to resources rather than repeatedly scheduling dataset
execution tasks removes the temporal sequencing that drives
the scheduling complexity in classical pipelined workflows.
The hardness of WORKSWORLD instead arises from multi-
resource placement under network constraints, which proves
structurally identical to the NP-hard virtual network embed-
ding problem (Fischer et al. 2013).
Classical and Numeric Planning
AI Planning, or automated planning and scheduling, con-
sists of leveraging computers and algorithms to generate
plans to execute towards achieving a set of goals; Ghallab,
Nau and Traverso (2004) cover in detail topics we discuss
briefly.
Classical planning possesses the most restrictive as-
sumptions but maintains a general complexity of PSPACE-
complete (Bylander 1994); it does not permit reasoning
about numeric variables. Planning systems that interact with
real-world physical systems often require numeric plan-
ning (Scala et al. 2016). Numbers increase the complexity
in the worst case to semi-decidable and removes bounds on
plan length possible in propositional planning (Haslum et al.
2019). Even so, we leverage numeric planning in our work
due to our foundational dependency on numeric measure-
ments of compute, storage and network resource availabil-
ity. Due to the permanent nature of our data pipelines, we
do not leverage temporal planning to reason about time as
the ordering of actions (i.e. sequential planning) to schedule
and connect components suffices.
In the past three decades, the AI planning community pro-
duced several solvers capable of planning with numerics:
MetricFF (Hoffmann 2003), LP-td (Gerevini, Saetti, and Se-
rina 2006), SMTPLAN+ (Cashmore et al. 2016). We exclu-
sively evaluate ENHSP2 due to the functionality it supports
2https://sites.google.com/view/enhsp/
(i.e. Quantifiers in pre-conditions and goals), its support for
parsing large problem files and domains (resp. MetricFF),
and its effective pruning of the search space with Addi-
tive Interval-Based Relaxation (AIBR) preprocessing (Scala
et al. 2016). We leave finding additional compatible plan-
ners and testing them for future work (e.g. SMTPLAN+,
GOOSE (Chen and Thi´ebaux 2024)).
With our scope established, we turn to defining the gen-
eral numeric planning problem we solve. We reproduce oth-
ers’ work (Fox and Long 2003; Scala et al. 2016, 2020)
minimally for the readers’ benefit. The state of our system
(si ∈S) amounts to a total assignment of a set of propo-
sitional variables (F) and a partial assignment of numeric
variables (X := {x | x ∈R}); let the set of all variables
V = F ∪X. Propositional conditions are positive literals
(p = ⊤) or negative literals (p = ⊥) where p ∈F. Nu-
meric conditions take the form ⟨ξ, ⊵, l⟩where ξ is a nu-
meric expression over a subset of X, ⊵∈{≤, <, =, >, ≥}
and l ∈Q. The operators permitted in these expressions
are specific to the planner (or heuristic) leveraged, we cur-
rently leverage the standard set of operators +, −, ×, ÷ in
WORKSWORLD; ENHSP supports more. With the basics
covered, Definition 2 describes a numeric action and Defi-
nition 3 formulates the numeric planning problem.
Definition 2 (Numeric Action). A numeric action a con-
sists of two sets: pre(a) the set of numeric and propositional
pre-conditions permitting a planner to select an action and
eff(a) the set of propositional and numeric effects that de-
fine the resulting state changes after executing the action
(a = ⟨pre(a), eff(a)⟩). Propositional effects set (p = ⊤)
or unset (p = ⊥) a proposition p ∈F. Numeric effects can
assign (=), increase (+=) or decrease (−=) numeric vari-
ables x ∈X by ξ. An action’s eff(a) must only update a
variable x at most once.
Definition 3 (Numeric Planning Problem). A numeric plan-
ning problem ( Π = ⟨s0, A, G, V⟩) consists of an initial state
(s0), which is an initial assignment (complete for F) to the
variables in V = F ∪X, a set of numeric actions (A), and a
set of propositional or numeric goal conditions (G).
The act of planning involves selecting a sequence of ac-
tions that transitions our system from the initial state s0 to a
goal state sg that satisfies ( |= ) all g ∈G or sg |= G. This
sequence of actions is the planner’s output plan π. We re-
produce Definition 4 from (Scala et al. 2016) with a slight
modification to the description of an optimal plan; see their
work for more details on the applicability of numeric actions
in a state.
Definition 4 (Plan). A plan π for Π = ⟨s0, A, G, V⟩is a
sequence of actions a0, . . . , an−1 from A such that each ac-
tion in π is applicable in the state resulting from the applica-
tion of its predecessors, i.e., s0 |= pre(a0), succ(s0, a0) |=
pre(a1), etc, and succ(sn−1, an−1) |= G. A plan π is said to
be optimal if, among all valid plans, it has a minimal num-
ber of actions (by default) or it minimizes or maximizes some
specified x ∈X or ξ over {x}.
With our problem and desired solution sufficiently spec-
ified, we turn to describing the required inputs for domain-
independent planners.
Planning Inputs
The ability to encode a planning problem into a common
format permits the creation of domain-independent solvers;
a single solver for many types, or domains, of problems.
The AI Planning Community produced several versions of
Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) to standard-
ize inputs across planners (Ghallab et al. 1998; Fox and
Long 2003; Edelkamp and Hoffmann 2004; Gerevini and
Long 2005) We encode the WORKSWORLD in PDDL 2.1
level 2 (Fox and Long 2003) which permits our use of nu-
meric fluents (or functions); we do not leverage the dura-
tive actions of level 3. For an in-depth overview of PDDL
see (Haslum et al. 2019).
To solve the planning problem of Definition 3, AI plan-
ners require a planning instance (I = ⟨Domain, Problem⟩)
encoded in PDDL as input. While the domain gets defined
once, generating problem instances in PDDL, especially
when s0 or V prove large, remains a well-known barrier
to users leveraging AI planners. Therefore we permit users
(or systems) to more concisely define the problem instance
using a popular human-readable data serialization language
(YAML3) to produce a problem configuration file with com-
mon units and minimal requirements. We leverage a templat-
ing library (Jinja4) and python scripts to produce problem
instances in PDDL from the supplied configuration file. The
PDDL contains additional values from calculations across
input values as well as consistent units to minimize math-
ematical operations required during planning (i.e. storage
in MB and bandwidth in MB/s); see example YAML and
PDDL files available online5.
4
General Problem Formulation
We start by defining our environment, which informs our re-
source graph, and the workflows we seek to efficiently dis-
tribute. Figure 3 depicts our sites and their main resources.
The site, see Definition 5, proves the foundational abstrac-
tion of our environment. We assume that an organization
manages specific sites and peers them, bringing them from
the set of globally available sites (S) into a subset (Speers
m
)
considered for scheduling; see Equation 1. Peered sites must
have at least one link connecting to the set of peers. These
logical links (e.g. in a Software-Defined WAN) can be di-
rect, or composite consisting of two hops. These sites pos-
sess data sources of a specific data type (srct) that serve as
inputs to our workflows. They also may have sinks which are
applications that consume workflow outputs.
Speers
m
:= {sn | sn ∈S and ∃l(sm, sn)}
(1)
Definition 5 (Site). We define a site (sm) that exists in the
set of peered sites (Speers
m
) as a list of three sets: the set of in-
terfaces (Im) located at the site, a set of relations (Lm) to de-
scribe intrasite and intersite network connections to peered
3https://yaml.org/
4https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/
5https://github.com/taylorpaul/WORKSWORLD
Fog (
)
Edge (
)
 
 
Cloud (
)
Figure 3: Sites and the relevant annotations and resources
for our scheduling problem.
sites, and the set of site-level annotations (Am) to capture
properties of the site where (indices m, i, k ∈N):
sm := { Im, Lm, Am } such that
Im := { ifm,i }
Lm := { lm,k(sm, sn) | sm, sn ∈Speers
m
}
Am := { properties of site m }
(2)
For this work, we present an interface abstraction to ex-
pose compute and storage resources for scheduling at sites.
Thus, we schedule on a single interface over a clustered set
of resources and simplify the number of metrics we must
track. We identify two types of interfaces: data sharing (d)
and data processing (p). We envision data sharing inter-
faces (DSIs) to have different performance characteristics
and resource costs (i.e. disk, CPU, RAM). There are exist-
ing open-source tools that an organization could standardize
across sites for streaming, object storage or file sharing (e.g.
Apache Kafka, CEPH, SeaweedFS, etc.). Data processing
interfaces (DPIs) prove most similar to resource managers
like Kubernetes, Docker Swarm, or Slurm. Making these in-
terfaces available as network-level resources for applications
to leverage requires changes to the current network model
(TCP/IP) which many others explore (Zhang et al. 2014;
Kr´ol et al. 2019; Paul and Regli 2024).
Definition 6 (Interface). We define an interface (if) as a
network-level resource to schedule workflow components
with a type (t): data sharing (d) or processing (p). A set of
metrics (IF R) describes the total and available resources.
(IF C) is the set of components instantiated on the if and a
set of annotations (IF A) describes hardware, software and
performance characteristics. We define (m, i, ∈N):
if t
m,i :=

IF R
m,i, IF C
m,i, IF A
m,i
	
such that t ∈{d, p} (3)
We establish our workflow components in Definition 7
that we will schedule on our interfaces and our rules for con-
necting them into a workflow; see Definition 8.
Definition 7 (Workflow Component). We define a workflow
component (wfcc,t) as a logical boundary of work required
by a workflow, delineating two classes of work: data pro-
cessing (p) or data sharing (d) of a specific type (t) from the
set of known component types (Tc), such that (x, y ∈N):
wfcc,t
x := { CR
c,t, CIO
x , CA
t,x | c ∈{p, d}, t ∈Tc}
CR
c,t := { amtr
c,t | r ∈{comp, store, mem, bw}}
CIO
x
:= {Cin
y−→
l x, Cout
x−→
l y | y ̸= x, l ∈Lm at sm}
CA
t,x := { properties of t or x }
(4)
Definition 8 (Workflow). We define a workflow as a DAG of
workflow components with components only connecting via
a link to one or more components of another class; d →p
or p →d but never d →d. A workflow must start and end
with one or more data components.
With these definitions in hand, we prove prepared to pur-
sue a planning and scheduling approach that can implement
our model and produce actions required to map our work-
flows onto our connected site resources.
5
Methodology
We document the WORKSWORLD domain and describe
its complexity. Then we describe our research questions and
corresponding experiments.
WORKSWORLD
Our main contribution is a new numeric planning do-
main, WORKSWORLD, that permits automated planning of
pipelined workflow graphs to process and deliver data in the
correct format to the desired site. We describe the domain’s
primary objects and actions leveraging a single-site repre-
sentation and discuss the added complexity when growing
the resource and workflow graph. We developed and tested
several iterations of the domain to achieve what we be-
lieve represents the right balance of expressivity, realism and
complexity.
Object Hierarcy
We introduce 17 object types to imple-
ment our model from Section 4 in our PDDL domain; see
Figure 4. For our resource graph we define types sites, con-
nected via links (direct and composite), interfaces (DSI/data
processing interface (DPI)) and resource. We leverage con-
stants of type resource in our domain: storage, compute, net-
work and config. These constants describe resources avail-
able on (links and interfaces) or required (workflow compo-
nents) by instance subtypes. We employ the config resource
to reason about whether or not we must copy a workflow
component configuration to a site or if it already exists there.
Thus we can account for the cost of copying configurations
like container images or model weights that may prove pro-
hibitively large. We also provide the domain constants input
and output of type direction, always relative to a processing
component. Figure 4 also contains the abbreviations for our
object types we employ throughout the paper.
Predicates (F)
Table 1 lists our 12 predicates; we discuss
the most relevant here and point the reader to comments in
the PDDL domain for details. The available at predi-
cate declares what links or interfaces exist at a site. We also
Object
Instance
Link
DL
CL
Interface
DSI
DPI
WC
DC
PC
Site
Resource
Descriptor
WCT
DCT
PCT
DIR
I: Instance
L: Link
DL: Direct Link
CL: Composite Link
IF: Interface
DSI: Data Sharing IF
DPI: Data Process. IF
WF: Workflow
WC: WF Component
DC: Data Comp.
PC: Process. Comp.
S: Site
R: Resource
WCT: WC Type
DCT: DC Type
PCT: PC Type
DIR: Direction
Figure 4: PDDL type hierarchy for WORKSWORLD and ab-
breviations utilized throughout paper.
Table 1: Available predicates and numeric fluents in
WORKSWORLD.
Predicates (F)
Numeric Fluents (X)
(available at I R S)
(resource total I R)
(scheduled on WC IF)
(resource available I R)
(type of WC WCT)
(work amount WC R)
(fixed WC)
(msg max rate WC)
(linked L S S)
(msg actual rate WC IF)
(link uses CL DL)
(msg size DCT)
(connected L PC DPI DC DSI DIR) (network latency L)
(has input WC IF)
(work-cost-weight R)
(input format PC DCT)
(total-cost)
(output format PC DCT)
(absolute-latency)
(processed by DC DSI PC DPI)
(has data DC DSI DC DSI)
use the predicate to describe if a configuration for a work-
flow component is available at a site. The fixed predicate
marks workflow components that the planner cannot sched-
ule. We use this for source and sink data components fixed
to specific sites, while ¬fixed components can be sched-
uled at multiple sites. The has data predicate tracks data
provenance through a planned workflow graph. In our goals,
it describes what source data component we want processed
into the format required by the destination sink data compo-
nent.
Numeric Fluents (X)
We leverage ten numeric flu-
ents
in
WORKSWORLD
depicted
in
Table
1.
Links
and
interfaces
must
have
resource total
and
resource available fluents assigned in the ini-
tial state; work amount fluents describe how many
resources (compute cores or storage bytes) scheduling
a component on an interface consumes. We multiply
msg max rate times msg size to consume permanent
bandwidth resources when connecting components across
links. We will discuss the other relevant numeric fluents
when we discuss WORKSWORLD’s cost and performance
calculations.
Table 2: Available actions in WORKSWORLD to build and
schedule pipelined workflows.
Actions (A) & Input Object Types
(replicate code WC S S L)
(schedule component WC R IF R S)
(connect direct link
PC DPI S DC DCT DSI S DL DIR)
(connect composite link
PC DPI S DC DCT DSI S CL DL DL DIR)
(propagate input PC DPI DC DSI DC DSI)
(propagate output PC DPI DC DSI DC DSI)
Actions (A)
Our action definitions prove the most influen-
tial on the compute and memory requirements during plan-
ning. The number of objects input into our actions greatly
affects the grounding time; the number of actions affects
ENHSP AIBR preprocessing step as it loops over each ac-
tion (Scala et al. 2016) to prune the state space. As we show
later, these times dominate our planning time as problem
sizes grow due to the size of the state space. Table 2 presents
our six actions and the objects they require as inputs. We
briefly walkthrough how a planner leverages our actions dur-
ing planning before discussing how the actions affect cost
and performance calculations.
Starting from s0, the planner builds a workflow graph sat-
isfying G by iteratively scheduling and connecting compo-
nents. To schedule component, the component’s con-
figuration must exist at the target site; replicate code
copies configurations from peered sites as needed. After
scheduling required data and processing components, the
planner connects them via connect direct link or
connect composite link based on available links,
bandwidth, and latency. It then selects propagate input
or propagate output depending on the connection di-
rection relative to the processing component, recording that
a downstream component has data from an upstream
source. This process repeats until the planner achieves all
goal conditions or the planner exhausts time limits, memory,
or the entire pruned state space.
Separating the propagate effects from our connect ac-
tions provides two benefits. First, we avoid conditional ef-
fects for input or output in the connect actions, which the
specific ENHSP heuristics (i.e. multi-repetition relaxed plan
(MRP) (Scala et al. 2020)) we require do not support6. Sec-
ond, we avoid requiring input and output versions of the
more complex connect actions which reduces the required
object combinations in actions during grounding; see object
inputs in Table 2.
Cost and Performance
In WORKSWORLD we minimize
on cost (see Definition 9) and constrain on a message
latency metric (see Definition 10) in G. Our use of a
domain-independent planner permits adapting these met-
rics with ease compared to domain specific optimization
algorithms. We increase the cost metric for every action
in Table 2 except the propagate actions. Importantly, we
6https://sites.google.com/view/enhsp/home/how-to-use-it
avoid utilizing resource available to avoid state-
dependent action costs; which ENHSP only experimen-
tally supports. We instead ensure links and interfaces do
not get over provisioned via pre(a) checking for sufficient
resource available.
Definition 9 (Total Cost). We define total-cost as a weighted
(work-weight R) resource utilization (work amount WC R)
normalized by resource total (resource total I R) on a link or
interface.
For our latency measure, due to an inability to track the
bottleneck path and report the worst case latency, we in-
stead define absolute latency in Definition 10. We in-
crease this numeric fluent in every action that establishes a
permanent part of the workflow: the schedule and connect
actions. Again, we apply a similar strategy to avoid state-
dependent calculations by calculating latencies with a con-
stant numeric fluent (msg max rate). We avoid more de-
tailed definitions of cost and latency here due to space but
point a curious reader to the domain PDDL for details.
Definition 10 (Absolute Latency). We define absolute-
latency as the sum of the time (seconds) it takes a single
message to traverse every edge of the workflow graph.
WORKSWORLD Expressivity
WORKSWORLD general-
izes to any workflow expressible as a DAG of alternating
data sharing and processing steps where components remain
online until deprovisioned. This covers data pipelines com-
mon in sensing, scientific computing, and machine learning.
It does not cover short-lived batch jobs that maximize com-
pute utilization or minimize makespan across temporal tasks
(e.g. some HPC workloads).
State Space Complexity
We present Table 3 on the
grounded state-space complexity increase as our problem
sizes grow. We declare objects types that have multiple in-
puts to the same action (see Table 2) have the potential to im-
pact the state space most significantly. While this table helps
understand object-level complexity, there are combinatorial
effects when we add sites and/or workflow components. Ta-
ble 4 presents the state-space increase when adding sites,
with their interfaces and links, and also when adding an
extra data and processing component. Fortunately, ENHSP
smartly prunes this state space before initializing search to
permit sufficiently large problem sizes. We explore this in
our experiments next.
Table 3: Additional predicates (F), numeric fluents (X), and
grounded actions (A) required by additional object types.
Object Type
F
X
A
Site
0
0
O(n2)
Direct Link
2
3
O(n2)
Composite Link
4
3
O(n)
Interface (DSI/DPI)
1
2
O(n2)
Data Component
2
3
O(n2)
Processing Component
4
3
O(n2)
Resource
0
1
O(n2)
Table 4: Grounding comparison: Predicates (F), Numeric
Fluents (X), and Grounded Actions (A) before and after
AIBR preprocessing.
Problem Size
F (AIBR)
X (AIBR)
A (AIBR)
2WFC, 1S
22 (8)
7 (6)
14 (6)
2WFC, 2S
96 (24)
14 (12)
90 (22)
2WFC, 3S
306 (39)
22 (19)
284 (51)
4WFC, 3S
843 (81)
28 (25)
1146 (109)
Experiments Overview
We possess two research questions we seek to answer about
WORKSWORLD:
1. (RQ1) How does increasing the size of the workflow and
resource graph affect the state space ENHSP searches?
2. (RQ2) Does the domain definition permit scaling to large
enough problems to plan and schedule workflows cen-
trally across an enterprise?
We design and execute two experiments. First, we lever-
age our configuration and problem generator to observe state
space growth from Table 3 by individually increasing object
types. Second, we explore a larger combination of compo-
nents, interfaces, sites and links that ENHSP can solve in
reasonable time (one hour) and space (30 GB of RAM).
Environment
and
Configurations
We
use
Cloud-
Lab (Duplyakin et al. 2019) with a reproducible profile7 that
automatically configures our benchmarking environment.
We deploy three c64208 nodes (dual sixteen-core processors
at 2.6 GHz, 384GB DDR4 memory) running Kubernetes
with open-source tools for metrics collection, storage, and
visualization. Container images build and deploy to our
Kubernetes cluster via a GitLab pipeline9. We constrain
solver containers to five cores and 30 GB RAM with
a one-hour CPU time limit per run. Each problem runs
20 independent times, and we report the 95th percentile
with five-percent confidence intervals for measures with
variation. ENHSP runs with a 30GB Java heap using the
hMRP
max + H heuristic (Scala et al. 2020) (sat-hmrph
flag10).
6
Results
Figure 5 shows results from our first experiment solving
linear workflow chains while varying a single object type.
As a baseline, s0 contains one site with one intrasite link,
one DSI and DPI, and one scheduled source data compo-
nent. For the top-left plot, we exponentially increase work-
flow components to schedule from two until failure at 128.
For interfaces, we fix two components (to schedule) while
exponentially increasing DSIs/DPI from two each (4 total)
to failure at 64 each (128 total). For direct links, we scale in-
trasite links exponentially to 64 without failure. Finally, we
7https://gitlab.com/thpaul/k8s-promstack-profile
8https://docs.cloudlab.us/hardware.html
9https://gitlab.com/thpaul/worksworld-benchmarks
10https://sites.google.com/view/enhsp/home/how-to-use-it
add sites exponentially (each with one DSI, one DPI, one in-
trasite link, and one direct link to a central site), succeeding
at 32 sites but failing at 64.
Figure 5: Planning and scheduling linear-chain workflows
varying one aspect: workflow components, interfaces, direct
links and sites.
Figure 6 presents our results from experiment two.
From our first experiment, we selected a resource graph
that produces reasonable planning times but is also rep-
resentative of a mid-sized organization. We include eight
sites in our initial state, each with a DSI/DPI with uni-
form resource total across sites but randomly var-
ied resource available values. We connect them via
seven direct links (with eight intrasite links) in a hub-spoke
structure with the first site connected to all other sites. We
then establish 14 composite links to permit over half of the
possible two-hop connections (
 7
2

= 21). We increase the
size of the workflow scheduled by two’s from two to 16 com-
ponents; 14 components just meet our memory and time lim-
its, 16 components fail. We include total solver container en-
ergy measures from Kepler (Amaral et al. 2023), generated
by reading the intel RAPL11 metrics on each node, to report
sustainability results and showcase the extensibility of our
Kubernetes benchmark environment.
7
Discussion
Figure 5 addresses RQ1. In the Vary WFC subplot,
most metrics transition from exponential to sub-exponential
growth between 16 and 32 components, suggesting effec-
tive pruning, while AIBR preprocessing remains exponen-
tial throughout. For direct links, ENHSP handles added
predicates and fluents efficiently. For interfaces, the plan-
ner prunes effectively but preprocessing grows exponen-
11https://sustainable-computing.io/archive/design/kepler-
energy-sources/
Figure 6: Planning and scheduling variable length linear-chain workflows on a complex resource graph (8S, 16IF, 15DL, 14CL).
tially, becoming the planning bottleneck. This effect inten-
sifies when scaling sites (each adding two interfaces and
two links). In sum, AIBR preprocessing proves effective yet
emerges as the primary scalability bottleneck; accelerating
this step is a natural future research direction.
Figure 6 addresses RQ2. ENHSP with WORKSWORLD
can serve as a centralized planner for linear-chain work-
flows at a realistic resource graph size. The sub-exponential
growth across all metrics, with the exception of AIBR pre-
processing, supports this conclusion. The resource graph
(8S, 16IF, 15DL, 14CL) represents a realistic mid-sized en-
terprise with two cloud, two fog, and four edge sites. How-
ever, the linear-chain assumption limits realism; we leave
non-linear series-parallel workflows for future work.
8
Related Works
A broad body of literature addresses workflow schedul-
ing and planning. We focus on work most similar to our
pipelined-workflow approach using AI planning techniques.
First, we discuss available planning domains for compute
resource planning and scheduling. Seipp et al. (2022) pro-
vide an online repository of existing domains. The Data-
network domain proves most similar to WORKSWORLD,
modeling servers with different RAM capacities that re-
ceive, process and send files across a network. Like
WORKSWORLD, goals declare desired data formats on spe-
cific servers. However, this domain uses PDDL 2.2 level 1
(non-numeric planning) with PDDL 3.1 action costs, while
WORKSWORLD fully supports numeric planning for more
realistic resource modeling. Numeric planning domains also
exist from the International Planning Competition numeric
track12, though none closely resemble WORKSWORLD.
Second, we discuss works leveraging AI planning for sim-
ilar problems. Arshad et al. 2003 develop Planit, which uses
the LPG planner (Agnew, Hofmeister, and Purtilo 1994)
to dynamically reconfigure software systems by scheduling
components and point-to-point connectors, whereas we pro-
vide DSIs for multi-component data sharing. Kichkaylo et
al. 2003 use node and link-level abstractions to place compo-
nents for applications (secure mail, webcast) by compiling
12https://github.com/ipc2023-numeric/ipc2023-dataset
placement into planning problems. Riabov et al. 2005 solve
workflow planning by declaring input and output streams
but define a PDDL extension (Stream Processing Planning
Language) that prevents testing with domain-independent
planners. Shorabi et al. 2013 use hierarchical task network
(HTN) planning for workflows in vendor-specific platforms,
exploring optimal planning of graphs with 30–170 com-
ponents; we explore satisficing planning and scheduling
on resources in a vendor-agnostic manner. Most recently,
Amado et al. 2025 group data pipeline tasks into Kubernetes
pods to minimize execution time for a vendor-specific appli-
cation. Compared to these works, we operate at a higher ab-
straction level, reasoning over sites containing resources and
generating plans in a vendor and platform-agnostic manner.
9
Conclusion
We introduced WORKSWORLD, a numeric domain for in-
tegrated planning and scheduling of permanent workflows.
We showed empirically that a state-of-the-art planner can
solve the joint planning and scheduling problem we defined
in reasonable time and space for simple workflows on com-
plex resource graphs. The domain and our other engineer-
ing artifacts are available publicly to benefit the AI planning
community. Beyond future work mentioned earlier, we in-
tend to explore leveraging state dependent action costs in
the domain to permit greater cost penalty when scheduling
on high utilization instances by normalizing work scheduled
with our state-dependent resource available fluent.
These state dependent variables would also permit a more
conservative resource consumption based on actual rates
instead of max rates for data components. We believe in-
creasing the types of DSIs modelled in WORKSWORLD
could permit interesting tradeoffs for a planner deciding to
schedule workflow components with strict latency require-
ments on memory-based interfaces; latency tolerant work-
flows on disk-backed interfaces. We also believe our work-
flow and resource graph facilitate easy division of work and
believe a hierarchy of planners could collaboratively solve
the scheduling portion of the problem.
References
Agnew, B.; Hofmeister, C.; and Purtilo, J. 1994. Planning for
change: A reconfiguration language for distributed systems.
Distributed Systems Engineering, 1(5): 313.
Altintas, I.; Perez, I.; Mishin, D.; Trouillaud, A.; Irving, C.;
Graham, J.; Tatineni, M.; Defanti, T.; Strande, S.; Smarr, L.;
and Norman, M. 2022. Towards a Dynamic Composabil-
ity Approach for using Heterogeneous Systems in Remote
Sensing. In 2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on
e-Science (e-Science). IEEE.
Amado, L. R.; Vogel, A.; Griebler, D.; Licks, G. P.; Simon,
E.; and Meneguzzi, F. 2025. Automated Planning for Opti-
mal Data Pipeline Instantiation. CoRR, abs/2503.12626.
Amaral, M.; Chen, H.; Chiba, T.; Nakazawa, R.; Choo-
chotkaew, S.; Lee, E. K.; and Eilam, T. 2023. Kepler: A
Framework to Calculate the Energy Consumption of Con-
tainerized Applications. In 2023 IEEE 16th International
Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 69–71.
Arshad, N.; Heimbigner, D.; and Wolf, A. L. 2003.
De-
ployment and dynamic reconfiguration planning for dis-
tributed software systems. In Proceedings. 15th IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence,
39–46. IEEE.
Benoit, A.; C¸ ataly¨urek, ¨U. V.; Robert, Y.; and Saule, E. 2013.
A survey of pipelined workflow scheduling: Models and al-
gorithms. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 45(4): 1–36.
Bylander, T. 1994. The computational complexity of propo-
sitional STRIPS planning. Artificial Intelligence, 69(1-2):
165–204.
Cashmore, M.; Fox, M.; Long, D.; and Magazzeni, D. 2016.
A compilation of the full PDDL+ language into SMT. In
Proceedings of the international conference on automated
planning and scheduling, volume 26, 79–87.
Challapally, A.; Pease, C.; Raskar, R.; and Chari, P. 2025.
The GenAI Divide: State of AI in Business 2025. Techni-
cal report, MIT NANDA. Preliminary findings from Project
NANDA.
Chen, D.; and Thi´ebaux, S. 2024. Graph learning for nu-
meric planning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 37: 91156–91183.
Da Silva, R. F.; Bard, D.; Chard, K.; De Witt, S.; Foster, I. T.;
Gibbs, T.; Goble, C.; Godoy, W.; Gustafsson, J.; Haus, U.-
U.; et al. 2024. Workflows community summit 2024: Future
trends and challenges in scientific workflows. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.14943.
Duplyakin, D.; Ricci, R.; Maricq, A.; Wong, G.; Duerig,
J.; Eide, E.; Stoller, L.; Hibler, M.; Johnson, D.; Webb, K.;
Akella, A.; Wang, K.; Ricart, G.; Landweber, L.; Elliott, C.;
Zink, M.; Cecchet, E.; Kar, S.; and Mishra, P. 2019. The
Design and Operation of CloudLab. In Proceedings of the
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), 1–14.
Dustdar, S.; Pujol, V. C.; and Donta, P. K. 2023. On Dis-
tributed Computing Continuum Systems.
IEEE Transac-
tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(4): 4092–
4105.
Edelkamp, S.; and Hoffmann, J. 2004. PDDL2. 2: The lan-
guage for the classical part of the 4th international planning
competition. Technical report, Technical Report 195, Uni-
versity of Freiburg.
Fischer, A.; Botero, J. F.; Beck, M. T.; De Meer, H.; and
Hesselbach, X. 2013. Virtual network embedding: A survey.
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 15(4): 1888–
1906.
Foster, I.; Kesselman, C.; and Tuecke, S. 2001.
The
Anatomy of the Grid: Enabling Scalable Virtual Organiza-
tions. The International Journal of High Performance Com-
puting Applications, 15(3): 200–222.
Fox, M.; and Long, D. 2003. PDDL2. 1: An extension to
PDDL for expressing temporal planning domains. Journal
of artificial intelligence research, 20: 61–124.
Gerevini, A.; and Long, D. 2005.
Plan constraints and
preferences in PDDL3. Technical report, Technical Report
2005-08-07, Department of Electronics for Automation ....
Gerevini, A.; Saetti, A.; and Serina, I. 2006. An approach
to temporal planning and scheduling in domains with pre-
dictable exogenous events. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 25: 187–231.
Ghallab, M.; Howe, A.; Knoblock, C.; McDermott, I. D.;
Ram, A.; Veloso, M.; Weld, D.; Sri, D. W.; Barrett, A.;
Christianson, D.; et al. 1998. PDDL — The Planning Do-
main Definition Language Version 1.2. Technical Report,
Tech. Rep.
Ghallab, M.; Nau, D.; and Traverso, P. 2004. Automated
Planning: theory and practice. Elsevier.
Goedegebuure,
A.;
Kumara,
I.;
Driessen,
S.;
Van
Den Heuvel, W.-J.; Monsieur, G.; Tamburri, D. A.;
and Nucci, D. D. 2024.
Data mesh: a systematic gray
literature review. ACM Computing Surveys, 57(1): 1–36.
Haslum, P.; Lipovetzky, N.; Magazzeni, D.; Muise, C.;
Brachman, R.; Rossi, F.; and Stone, P. 2019. An introduc-
tion to the planning domain definition language, volume 13.
Springer.
Heck, P. 2024. What About the Data? A Mapping Study
on Data Engineering for AI Systems. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 3rd International Conference on AI Engineering
- Software Engineering for AI, CAIN 2024, 43–52. ACM.
Hoffmann, J. 2003. The Metric-FF Planning System: Trans-
lating “Ignoring Delete Lists” to Numeric State Variables.
Journal of artificial intelligence research, 20: 291–341.
Hou, C.-Y.; Altintas, I.; Jaeger-Frank, E.; Gilbert, L.; Moore,
R.; Rajasekar, A.; and Marciano, R. 2006. A scientific work-
flow solution to the archiving of digital media.
In 2006
Workshop on Workflows in Support of Large-Scale Science,
1–10.
Howey, R.; Long, D.; and Fox, M. 2004. VAL: Automatic
plan validation, continuous effects and mixed initiative plan-
ning using PDDL. In 16th IEEE International Conference
on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, 294–301. IEEE.
Kichkaylo, T.; Ivan, A.; and Karamcheti, V. 2003.
Con-
strained component deployment in wide-area networks us-
ing AI planning techniques. In Proceedings International
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, 10–pp.
IEEE.
Kreuzberger, D.; K¨uhl, N.; and Hirschl, S. 2023. Machine
learning operations (mlops): Overview, definition, and archi-
tecture. IEEE access, 11: 31866–31879.
Kr´ol, M.; Mastorakis, S.; Oran, D.; and Kutscher, D. 2019.
Compute First Networking: Distributed Computing meets
ICN.
In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on
Information-Centric Networking, ICN ’19, 67–77. ACM.
Long, D.; Dolejsi, J.; and Stolba, M. 2023. Scheduling prob-
lems in PDDL. In Workshop on Knowledge Engineering for
Planning and Scheduling.
Mell, P. M.; and Grance, T. 2011. The NIST definition of
cloud computing. National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology.
Moreschini, S.; Pecorelli, F.; Li, X.; Naz, S.; Hastbacka, D.;
and Taibi, D. 2022. Cloud Continuum: The Definition. IEEE
Access, 10: 131876–131886.
Paul, T.; and Regli, W. 2024. Accelerating the Operation
of Complex Workflows through Standard Data Interfaces.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13339.
Riabov, A.; and Liu, Z. 2005. Planning for stream processing
systems. In AAAI, 1205–1210.
Scala, E.; Haslum, P.; Thi´ebaux, S.; and Ramirez, M. 2016.
Interval-based relaxation for general numeric planning. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-second European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 655–663.
Scala, E.; Saetti, A.; Serina, I.; and Gerevini, A. E.
2020.
Search-Guidance Mechanisms for Numeric Plan-
ning Through Subgoaling Relaxation. In Proceedings of the
30th International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling (ICAPS), 226–234. AAAI Press.
Seipp, J.; Torralba, ´A.; and Hoffmann, J. 2022. PDDL Gen-
erators. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6382173.
Sohrabi, S.; Udrea, O.; Ranganathan, A.; and Riabov, A.
2013. HTN planning for the composition of stream process-
ing applications. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 23,
443–451.
Suter, F.; Da Silva, R. F.; Gainaru, A.; and Klasky, S. 2023.
Driving Next-Generation Workflows from the Data Plane.
In 2023 IEEE 19th International Conference on e-Science
(e-Science), 1–10.
Versluis, L.; and Iosup, A. 2021.
A survey of domains
in workflow scheduling in computing infrastructures: Com-
munity and keyword analysis, emerging trends, and tax-
onomies. Future Generation Computer Systems, 123: 156–
177.
Vivas, A.; Tchernykh, A.; and Castro, H. 2024. Trends, Ap-
proaches, and Gaps in Scientific Workflow Scheduling: A
Systematic Review. IEEE Access, 12: 182203–182231.
Zhang, L.; Afanasyev, A.; Burke, J.; Jacobson, V.; Claffy,
K.; Crowley, P.; Papadopoulos, C.; Wang, L.; and Zhang, B.
2014. Named data networking. ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, 44(3): 66–73.
