Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
Priyanka Kargupta, Shuhaib Mehri, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Jiawei Han
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, United States
pk36,mehri2,dilek,hanj@illinois.edu
Abstract
Despite interdisciplinary research leading to larger and longer-
term impact, most work remains confined to single-domain aca-
demic silos. Recent AI-based approaches to scientific discovery
show promise for interdisciplinary research, but many prioritize
rapidly designing experiments and solutions, bypassing the ex-
ploratory, collaborative reasoning processes that drive creative
interdisciplinary breakthroughs. As a result, prior efforts largely
prioritize automating scientific discovery rather than augment-
ing the reasoning processes that underlie scientific disruption. We
present Idea-Catalyst, a novel framework that systematically
identifies interdisciplinary insights to support creative reasoning in
both humans and large language models. Starting from an abstract
research goal, Idea-Catalyst is designed to assist the brain-
storming stage, explicitly avoiding premature anchoring on specific
solutions. The framework embodies key metacognitive features
of interdisciplinary reasoning: (a) defining and assessing research
goals, (b) awareness of a domain’s opportunities and unresolved
challenges, and (c) strategic exploration of interdisciplinary ideas
based on impact potential. Concretely, Idea-Catalyst decom-
poses an abstract goal (e.g., improving human-AI collaboration) into
core target-domain research questions that guide the analysis of
progress and open challenges within that domain. These challenges
are reformulated as domain-agnostic conceptual problems, enabling
retrieval from external disciplines (e.g., Psychology, Sociology) that
address analogous issues. By synthesizing and recontextualizing
insights from these domains back into the target domain, Idea-
Catalyst ranks source domains by their interdisciplinary poten-
tial. Empirically, this targeted integration improves average novelty
by 21% and insightfulness by 16%, while remaining grounded in
the original research problem. Overall, Idea-Catalyst provides
a structured framework for boundary-spanning research ideation,
with implications for both AI-assisted human creativity and auto-
mated scientific discovery.
 Project Page
§ Repository
õ Dataset
CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies →Knowledge representation
and reasoning.
Keywords
Scientific discovery, creative reasoning, human-AI collaboration
1
Introduction
Scientific breakthroughs rarely arise from a single, isolated “eureka”
moment. Instead, research ideation unfolds as a complex, iterative
formation process in which creative solutions emerge through the
gradual synthesis of many fragmentary and partial ideas [10, 38].
These early, tangible conceptual fragments, often originating from
multiple domains [45], act as seeds for discussion, critique, and col-
laboration. They open up more meaningful research questions and
address each other’s conceptual gaps and challenges, gradually coa-
lescing into more mature research directions [10, 38]. This pattern
recurs throughout the history of scientific progress. Reinforcement
learning, now a foundational paradigm in machine learning, did not
originate within a single field but instead emerged from the conver-
gence of behavioral psychology’s reward-driven learning principles,
control theory’s mathematical formalizations, and animal learning
psychology’s insights into secondary reinforcement signals [40], as
illustrated in Figure 1. The field advanced through the accumulation,
recombination, and refinement of ideas contributed by researchers
operating under diverse conceptual lenses.
CS Problem: Teaching agents to complete a task correctly.
Behavioral Psychology: 
Actions followed by reward become more likely.
Challenge: 
Not mathematically formalized & represented, nor scalable.
Control Theory: 
Formalizing the control of a system over time to optimize for a result.
Research Question: 
How can an agent identify earlier actions that caused an eventual reward?
Animal Learning Psychology: 
Secondary signals (e.g., bell) can mirror primary rewards (e.g., food).
Modern Reinforcement Learning: 
Developed across decades through interdisciplinary insights.
…
How do we identify 
which domains 
have the highest 
interdisciplinary 
potential?
interdisciplinary 
potential: 
resolving challenges 
in existing approaches 
& tackling unanswered 
research questions
Figure 1: Interdisciplinary process of formalizing RL [40].
Empirical evidence shows that interdisciplinary synthesis yields
substantially higher long-term impact, with each additional disci-
pline increasing citation impact by approximately 20% [31, 42].
Yet despite this benefit, deeply integrative interdisciplinary re-
search remains rare and fragile: only 5% of cross-domain work
involves high-involvement collaboration across non-neighboring
fields [32, 34]. A central challenge, then, is how to foster interdisci-
plinary scientific creativity and help researchers move beyond their
academic silos. Recent work on AI-driven scientific discovery has
explored the notion of “AI co-scientists,” in which large language
models (LLMs) support (and in many cases automate) key stages
of the research process, including ideation, experimentation, and
critique [9, 11, 18, 37]. Prior studies [36] comparing human- and
arXiv:2603.12226v1  [cs.CL]  12 Mar 2026
Kargupta et al.
LLM-generated ideas highlight a complementary but unresolved
tension [36]. Human-generated ideas are typically well grounded
in existing literature, datasets, and practical constraints, but tend
to remain focused on familiar problem formulations within a sin-
gle domain. LLM-generated ideas, in contrast, exhibit a stronger
tendency to draw inspiration from other disciplines, yet often do
so in surface-level or stereotyped ways that undermine motivation,
feasibility, and practical grounding [14, 36, 37].
Attempts to address these limitations by tightly coupling LLM
ideation with automatic experiment execution [18, 37] introduce
further trade-offs. While grounding ideas through execution im-
proves feasibility, it also drives convergence toward incremental,
single-domain refinements, eroding the exploratory strengths and
cross-domain potential that initially distinguish LLM-based ideation
[37]. Similarly, other works primarily focus on generating execu-
tion plans from high-level research ideas, bypassing the exploratory
and collaborative processes of ideation [9, 17]. This pattern reflects
a broader challenge in research ideation: early-stage evaluation,
especially when driven by empirical validation, can be counter-
productive for creativity. As prior work notes, premature data and
evaluation can “cut the conversation” and curtail exploration of the
broader space of possibilities [2, 4].
To avoid prematurely anchoring on end-to-end automated solu-
tions and instead augment the initial creative ideation process itself,
we propose Idea-Catalyst, a novel framework for the automatic
generation of insightful, interdisciplinary idea fragments. Given
a research problem in a target domain (e.g., “teaching agents to
complete a task” in Computer Science), our goal is to surface con-
ceptual insights from external “source” domains (e.g., Behavioral
Psychology, Control Theory, Animal Learning Psychology) that can
either help resolve persistent challenges in existing target-domain
approaches or address research questions that remain unanswered
within the target domain. Our retrieval-augmented, hierarchical
ideation framework is guided by three core principles:
(1) Analyzing the target domain to assess progress and re-
veal challenges. We first decompose the overarching research
problem into a structured set of core research questions. By re-
trieving and analyzing target-domain literature conditioned on
each question, the framework identifies what has already been
addressed, where progress is uneven, and which challenges re-
main unresolved. Crucially, this analysis distinguishes between
domain-specific challenges (e.g., getting an algorithm to learn
reliably from limited or noisy feedback) and deeper conceptual
challenges (e.g., understanding what an agent should aim for
when its goals or feedback are unclear or change over time)
that persist despite extensive prior work.
(2) Exploring external source domains to uncover conceptu-
ally analogous solutions. For each unresolved conceptual
challenge, the framework queries & analyzes a diverse set of
external domains to determine whether similar problems have
been previously studied or solved under different assumptions,
formalisms, or empirical settings. This step emphasizes cross-
domain awareness, enabling the discovery of alternative per-
spectives, mechanisms, and abstractions that are absent from
the target domain but potentially transferable.
(3) Recontextualizing and strategically prioritizing interdis-
ciplinary insights. Finally, extracted insights from relevant
source domains are recontextualized into the language and con-
straints of the target domain, forming candidate idea fragments.
These fragments are then ranked based on their potential to
address high-impact challenges, balancing conceptual novelty
with relevance to the original research goals. This strategic
prioritization supports exploratory ideation while avoiding pre-
mature convergence or feasibility-driven pruning.
Overall, Idea-Catalyst provides a pathway for both AI-assisted
human research and autonomous scientific discovery systems to
engage in the kind of creative, boundary-spanning ideation process
that drives breakthrough innovations. It addresses the critical gap
in current automated scientific discovery methodologies by priori-
tizing the inherently exploratory, collaborative nature of research
while providing systematic structure to cross-domain knowledge
synthesis. Our main contributions are:
• We propose Idea-Catalyst, a metacognition-driven frame-
work that systematically guides interdisciplinary scientific ideation
through problem decomposition, cross-domain exploration, and
strategic prioritization.
• We introduce a structured dataset and evaluation framework
for benchmarking interdisciplinary research ideation across
novelty, insightfulness, relevance, and usefulness.
• We show through LLM-based and human evaluations that Idea-
Catalyst produces 21.38% more novel and 16.22% insightful
ideas, while remaining grounded in the target research problem.
2
Related Work
Interdisciplinary Research and Scientific Creativity. Prior
work in the science-of-science literature has shown that interdisci-
plinary research is a key driver of scientific innovation and long-
term impact, with ideas that integrate concepts across distant fields
often achieving substantially higher influence [31, 42]. Studies of
creative processes further emphasize that scientific breakthroughs
typically emerge through the gradual accumulation and recombi-
nation of partial ideas rather than isolated insights [10, 38], often
drawing from multiple conceptual domains [45]. Despite these ben-
efits, deeply integrative interdisciplinary research remains rare and
fragile [32, 34], in part because identifying which external domains
are meaningfully relevant—and how their ideas can be translated
into a target domain—poses a substantial cognitive and practical
challenge for individual researchers.
Automated Scientific Discovery and Research Ideation. Re-
cent advances in large language models have spurred work on
AI-assisted scientific discovery, including automated literature re-
view, hypothesis generation, research ideation, and experimental
planning [9, 11, 18, 20, 23, 37]. Systems such as SCIMON [43] and
benchmarks like IdeaBench [13] explore literature-grounded idea
generation and evaluation, finding that while LLMs tend to produce
highly novel ideas, they often lack technical depth, feasibility, or
strong grounding in concrete research challenges [36]. Moreover,
many automated approaches tightly couple ideation with execution
or early evaluation, which can bias exploration toward incremental,
single-domain refinements and reduce cross-domain creativity [37].
In contrast, Idea-Catalyst explicitly avoids premature execution
and instead focuses on supporting early-stage exploratory ideation
Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
Problem: 
Effective & reliable human-AI 
collaboration.
Target Domain: 
Computer Science
How can models infer and adapt to user 
intent and context in real time?
What feedback mechanisms improve 
trust and reduce cognitive load 
in human–AI collaboration?
domain-specific challenge
adapting in real-time scenarios with 
high inter- and intra-user variability
Adapting to diverse collaborators 
& evolving goals/environments.
conceptual challenge
…
(a) Identify the core research questions needed to solve problem:
(b) Explore target domain to discover what’s been solved & remaining challenges:
real-time intent inference
dynamic user modeling
adaptive task prediction
adaptive goal shifting
real-time behavioral adaptation
social role adaptation
group interaction variability
(c) Explore external domains to discover if the 
conceptual challenge has been solved:
Psychology
Sociology
(e) Recontextualize takeaways to the target domain
& rank insights based on interdisciplinary potential
Sociology
11/14 papers relevant
…
Takeaway 1/8:
Metacontrol State Model → dynamically balancing 
persistence (focusing on current goals) and flexibility 
(switching to new goals) can help adapt to unpredictable 
user behavior without being overly rigid or distractible.
Sociology + Computer Science
Maintain and update a latent, role-aware and socially sensitive 
interaction state, learned through feedback and perspective-taking.
1
2
Psychology
8/11 papers relevant
(d) Identify challenge-specific takeaways 
from papers of relevant domains
target domain queries
external domain queries
if NO relevant domains → decompose            into sub-questions 
Psychology + Computer Science
Explicitly learn/regulate a dynamic trade-off between persistence 
and flexibility, using prediction-error updates & anticipatory control.
Figure 2: Idea-Catalyst is a metacognition-driven framework that (a) analyzes target-domain progress, (b) identifies unresolved
challenges, (c) explores source domains for analogous insights, and (d) integrates them into interdisciplinary idea fragments.
The figure is illustrated with a real case study (summarized).
through structured target-domain analysis and strategically guided
interdisciplinary retrieval.
Human-Centered Scientific Knowledge Discovery. Comple-
mentary to fully automated methods, human-centered systems
leverage LLMs to support researchers in literature exploration,
question formulation, and iterative refinement [22]. Tools such as
IdeaSynth [33] and DiscipLink [49] demonstrate that interactive,
human-in-the-loop approaches can effectively support exploratory
thinking and interdisciplinary information seeking. However, these
systems typically rely on either user input or the LLM’s parametric
knowledge to suggest relevant domains, which can favor nearby
or familiar fields and overlook deeper conceptual analogies across
distant disciplines. Idea-Catalyst complements this line of work
by introducing a metacognition-driven framework that explicitly
decomposes target-domain problems, abstracts persistent concep-
tual challenges, and strategically guides cross-domain exploration—
supporting not only information access, but the discovery of high-
impact interdisciplinary insights.
3
Methodology
Idea-Catalyst aims to augment early-stage scientific ideation
by (a) decomposing research problems into core questions, (b) iden-
tifying unresolved conceptual challenges in the target domain, (c)
extracting insights from external source domains which address
these challenges, and (d) integrating them into an interdisciplinary
idea fragment. The overall framework is illustrated in Figure 2.
3.1
Preliminaries
3.1.1
Problem Formulation. To support early-stage conceptual
brainstorming, we assume as input only a short research problem
statement 𝑝(e.g., 1–2 sentences on effective and reliable human-AI
collaboration) situated within a target domain Dtarget (e.g., Nat-
ural Language Processing). Our objective is to generate a set of
interdisciplinary idea fragments F , where each fragment 𝑓𝑖∈F
is grounded in an external source domain D𝑠𝑖and comprised of a
set of literature-derived insights 𝑡∈𝑇𝑠𝑖. Each fragment proposes
a candidate interdisciplinary idea ˆ𝑇𝑠𝑖by recontextualizing these
insights to address 𝑝, thereby integrating concepts from D𝑠𝑖into
the target domain Dtarget.
Definition 3.1 (Target Domain). The target domain Dtarget de-
notes the primary scientific field in which the research problem 𝑝is
situated. It is characterized by its established literature, methodolo-
gies, problem formulations, and evaluation norms. The goal of our
framework is to augment ideation within Dtarget by introducing
conceptually grounded insights originating outside the domain.
Definition 3.2 (Source Domain). A source domain D𝑠is a scien-
tific field distinct from the target domain Dtarget, characterized by
its own literature, conceptual frameworks, and problem-solving
traditions. Source domains serve as potential reservoirs of trans-
ferable insights that, when appropriately recontextualized, may
help address unresolved conceptual challenges in Dtarget. To pro-
mote non-trivial interdisciplinary connections, we restrict source
domains to fields that are sufficiently distant from the target do-
main at a coarse-grained level of similarity (e.g., Computer Science
and Psychology), and exclude closely related subfields (e.g., Natural
Language Processing and Machine Learning).
Definition 3.3 (Interdisciplinary Insight). An interdisciplinary
insight 𝑡∈𝑇𝑠𝑖is a literature-grounded conceptual takeaway ex-
tracted from the source domain D𝑠𝑖. Such insights typically describe
mechanisms, principles, or abstractions that are not natively ex-
pressed in the target domain Dtarget but may become relevant when
mapped onto the research problem 𝑝.
Definition 3.4 (Interdisciplinary Potential). Interdisciplinary
potential denotes the expected value of an idea fragment 𝑓𝑖∈F
for advancing the research problem 𝑝through cross-domain in-
tegration. It reflects a fragment’s ability to (i) address unresolved
conceptual challenges in Dtarget, (ii) introduce non-trivial perspec-
tives from D𝑠𝑖, and (iii) plausibly inspire novel research directions
when recontextualized within the target domain. Idea fragments in
F are ranked according to this potential.
3.1.2
Scientific Literature Snippet Retrieval. To ground inter-
disciplinary ideation in existing scientific knowledge, we retrieve
Kargupta et al.
literature snippets using the Semantic Scholar Snippets API1 [24].
Given a natural-language query and a coarse-grained scientific
domain (Appendix C), the Snippets API returns short, relevance-
ranked text passages extracted from papers, along with their as-
sociated metadata. Given that Semantic Scholar performs the un-
derlying document parsing, indexing, and query-snippet relevance
matching internally, this allows us to treat snippet retrieval as a
black-box operation and focus on structuring the research ideation
process rather than optimizing retrieval models. For each query,
we retrieve the top-𝑘papers within a specified domain and aggre-
gate multiple snippets per paper when available. When snippet
text is unavailable or degenerate (e.g., identical to the paper title),
we fall back to retrieving the paper abstract to ensure minimal
contextual grounding. Retrieved snippets are used as lightweight,
fine-grained evidence for downstream analysis, enabling the identi-
fication of unresolved challenges and transferable conceptual in-
sights across domains while maintaining scalability across diverse
scientific fields.
3.2
Metacognition-Driven Ideation
Scientific research ideation is inherently creative, requiring ideas to
be both novel and useful [45]. A central component of this process
is metacognition: the ability to monitor, evaluate, and regulate one’s
own reasoning during problem solving [8, 25, 47]. Prior work shows
that creative performance depends on the metacognitive aware-
ness of which strategies are appropriate, when to apply them, and
how to assess progress. Inaccurate metacognitive monitoring can
disrupt how individuals guide and adjust their creative reasoning,
whereas stronger metacognition is consistently associated with
more effective creative problem solving [41]. Thus, we align our
framework to the following metacognitive behaviors [21]:
• Self-awareness: Assessing what is known, what remains un-
certain, and which aspects of a research problem are both chal-
lenging and actionable. In our framework, this corresponds to
evaluating how thoroughly different facets of problem 𝑝have
been addressed in the target-domain literature.
• Context awareness: Recognizing the assumptions, constraints,
and norms that shape a problem. For our task, this includes
recognizing target-domain limitations and identifying external
source domains that may offer complementary perspectives.
• Strategy selection: Choosing reasoning strategies aligned with
the nature of the problem. In practice, this involves selectively
exploring disciplines that are well suited to particular chal-
lenges and open research questions of 𝑝(e.g., control theory for
formalization, psychology for learning behavior).
• Goal management: Maintaining and adapting intermediate
objectives. This manifests as decomposing 𝑝into research ques-
tions, prioritizing those with the greatest potential for concep-
tual advancement, and assessing progress made, post-ideation.
• Evaluation: Monitoring the quality & promise of the reason-
ing process. Rather than prematurely enforcing feasibility, the
ideation process should assess whether insights meaningfully
address unresolved conceptual challenges.
Under this view, creative ideation emerges from the coordination
of two complementary reasoning modes [19]: critical reasoning,
1https://api.semanticscholar.org/api-docs/snippets
which emphasizes structured evaluation and analytical rigor, and
creative reasoning, which supports the generative synthesis of
novel and valuable ideas [5, 7]. Our framework balances these
modes by grounding ideation in a systematic analysis of the target
domain while preserving space for exploratory, interdisciplinary
reasoning that expands the solution space [15, 44].
3.3
Critical Reasoning over the Target Domain
Idea-Catalyst initiates the creative ideation process with a system-
atic analysis of Dtarget, grounding the model’s self-awareness and
context awareness in the current state of the literature (e.g., state-of-
the-art approaches, technical/conceptual limitations). This analysis
enables a structured, critical assessment of what has already been
addressed, where progress is uneven, and which conceptual chal-
lenges remain unresolved.
To steer ideation toward insights that are both novel and useful,
we analyze Dtarget to identify aspects of 𝑝that are weakly addressed
and therefore offer the greatest potential for impact. We first decom-
pose𝑝into a structured set of research questions𝑞𝑖∈Q, allowing us
to examine the problem from multiple complementary perspectives
that may exhibit varying levels of maturity in the existing literature.
Each question 𝑞𝑖is represented in two forms: a domain-specific
formulation 𝑞D
𝑖, expressed in the language and assumptions of
Dtarget, and a corresponding domain-agnostic formulation 𝑞′
𝑖that
abstracts away academic jargon and implementation details. This
dual representation enables precise assessment of progress within
Dtarget while facilitating conceptual cross-domain comparison. For
example, given the problem of “effective and reliable human–AI
collaboration” (Figure 2), the resulting research questions include:
Domain-Specific Question (𝑞D
𝑖)
Domain-Agnostic Question (𝑞′
1)
How can models be trained to dynami-
cally infer and adapt to user intent and
task context in real-time collaborative
scenarios?
How can understanding of intent and con-
text be updated through continuous in-
teraction?
How should a system decide when to
take initiative vs. defer to human to
maintain well-calibrated autonomy &
control across contexts?
When should control be exercised versus
withheld?
Table 1: Output examples of domain-specific & agnostic re-
search question pairs for “human-AI collaboration”.
For each research question 𝑞𝑖, we generate a set of natural-
language search queries that capture its domain-specific formu-
lation 𝑞D
𝑖
(e.g., real-time intent inference, dynamic user modeling).
These queries are used to retrieve a set of relevant papers and as-
sociated literature snippets {𝑑1, . . . ,𝑑𝑘} ⊂Dtarget (Section 3.1.2).
Based on the retrieved papers, we assess their relevance to 𝑞𝑖and
evaluate the extent to which the question has been addressed in
the target domain (e.g., largely resolved: Q𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑑⊆Q, partially
addressed: Q𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙, or largely unexplored: Q𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛). Crucially, this
analysis surfaces remaining critical, non-incremental challenges
𝑞𝑖
𝑗that are explicitly stated or implicitly suggested by the litera-
ture and are not resolved by existing approaches. Each remaining
challenge𝑞𝑖
𝑗inherits the same dual representation as its parent ques-
tion 𝑞𝑖, consisting of both a domain-specific and a domain-agnostic
formulation, as shown in Table 2.
Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
Domain-Specific Challenge (𝑞1,D
1
)
Domain-Agnostic Challenge (𝑞′1
1 )
How can a system adapt in real-time to
high inter/intra-user variability?
How can behavior adapt to diverse collab-
orators & evolving goals/environments?
Table 2: Outputted dual representation of a remaining chal-
lenge 𝑞𝑖
𝑗in addressing 𝑞𝑖, derived from analysis of Dtarget.
3.4
Creative Reasoning Across Source Domains
Having identified weakly addressed research questions and unre-
solved conceptual challenges in the target domain Dtarget, Idea-
Catalyst transitions from critical reasoning to creative exploration.
Rather than expanding the solution space indiscriminately, we use
insights from the target-domain analysis to strategically guide cross-
domain exploration toward directions with the greatest potential
for non-incremental interdisciplinary insight. Specifically, we prior-
itize research questions 𝑞𝑖∈Q𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛that remain largely unexplored
in Dtarget, as well as conceptual challenges 𝑞𝑖
𝑗∈Q𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙, where
alternative perspectives have the most potential to contribute.
This exploration is driven by the domain-agnostic form of each
selected question or challenge. By abstracting away target-domain
terminology and implementation details, these formulations isolate
the underlying conceptual gaps that remain unresolved (Table 2).
Such abstractions are more likely to correspond to theoretical con-
structs, explanatory frameworks, or empirical phenomena studied
in external fields, even when surface-level applications differ. Con-
sequently, domain-agnostic questions form the basis for selecting
candidate source domains and structuring cross-domain search.
3.4.1
Cross-Domain Retrieval. For each domain-agnostic ques-
tion or challenge 𝑞′, we first identify a small set of external source
domains that are plausibly relevant through analogy (e.g., how
groups coordinate in Sociology vs. how teams coordinate in human–
AI systems), shared mechanisms (e.g., adaptation through feedback
in Psychology vs. Control Theory), or transferable principles (e.g.,
reasoning about uncertainty in Cognitive Science vs. machine learn-
ing), while explicitly excluding domains that are overly proximal
to Dtarget. This selection reflects the intuition that more distant
domains are likelier to contribute novel perspectives rather than
incremental variations of existing approaches. For each selected
source domain D𝑠, we then generate a small set of search queries
which reflect the domain-specific vocabulary of D𝑠(e.g., specific
terminologies, frameworks →“cognitive load theory” or “social role
adaptation” in Sociology).
Using these queries, we retrieve papers and their respective
snippets (Section 3.1.2) from each source domain and analyze them
to determine whether they provide meaningful conceptual insight
into the challenge. For each source domain, we assess the relevance
of retrieved papers, where we only extract literature-grounded
conceptual takeaways 𝑡𝑖∈𝑇𝑞′
𝑠𝑖from domains where the majority
of retrieved papers are relevant to conceptual question/challenge
𝑞′. This ensures that the overall insight 𝑡𝑖of the source domain has
sufficient grounding in its literature and is not an isolated finding.
Table 3 showcases a real example of an insight from Psychology on
the “human-AI collaboration problem. Each insight is structured into
a set of takeaways, where each contains the specific source domain
concept and its underlying logic/perspective in understanding the
question/challenge 𝑞′𝑖
𝑗.
Source Domain Concept
How Does it Work?
Metacontrol
State
Model:
Goal-
directed behavior reflects a balance
between
persistence
(maintaining
current goals) and flexibility (switching
goals when conditions change).
Dynamic regulation between persis-
tence and flexibility allows adaptive be-
havior that remains focused while re-
sponding efficiently to changing goals
and environments [3].
Cognitive Control: Control processes
should be prospectively adjusted based
on the expected frequency of goal
switches.
Anticipatory adjustment of cognitive
control reduces the cost of goal switch-
ing, enabling smoother transitions and
lower cognitive load under frequent
change [12].
Dynamic Goal Pursuit: Goal pursuit
can be supported through just-in-time
adaptive interventions that monitor be-
havior and provide context-sensitive
support.
Real-time monitoring and adaptive feed-
back help sustain goal pursuit under
variability by aligning support with
evolving goals and situational demands
[30].
Table 3: Summarized conceptual takeaways 𝑡1,𝑡2 ∈𝑇psychology
for challenge 𝑞′1
1 in Table 2 and their top identified paper.
By grounding source domain exploration in domain-agnostic
challenges and emphasizing conceptual relevance over method-
ological similarity, Idea-Catalyst enables the systematic discov-
ery of interdisciplinary perspectives that meaningfully expand the
ideation space. The resulting conceptual takeaways form the foun-
dation for the subsequent recontextualization and integration stage,
where insights from multiple source domains are mapped back into
Dtarget to generate candidate interdisciplinary idea fragments.
3.5
Target–Source Interdisciplinary Integration
While interdisciplinary insights from source domains may already
inspire researchers to explore new perspectives or refine existing
ideas, we further examine whether such insights can be meaning-
fully integrated with the target domain Dtarget. This integration
step allows us to assess which insights extend beyond inspiration to
support concrete, cross-domain synthesis, and thus exhibit strong
interdisciplinary potential.
Idea Fragments. We define an idea fragment as a structured,
intermediate representation capturing a conceptual mechanism,
principle, or strategy extracted from a source domain and recontex-
tualized for the target domain. Formally, an idea fragment links: (i) a
target-domain research challenge with its relevant retrieved papers,
(ii) source-domain conceptual takeaways & corresponding litera-
ture, and (iii) a rationale describing how the takeaway could address
the target-domain challenge. Idea fragments are intentionally in-
complete: they are designed to support creative ideation rather than
prescribe full solutions, aiming to capture promising directions for
synthesis by articulating how concepts from D𝑠could be combined
with existing approaches in Dtarget.
Generating Integrated Fragments. For each eligible question–
source-domain pair (𝑞𝑖, D𝑠), we integrate the most relevant source-
domain takeaways and their corresponding papers with the rele-
vant literature retrieved from Dtarget. Integration is guided by three
considerations: (i) how target-domain methods and assumptions
can be complemented by source-domain perspectives, (ii) how the
combined view addresses the specific challenge underlying 𝑞𝑖, and
(iii) how limitations of either domain are mitigated through syn-
thesis. The outcome is an idea fragment 𝑓𝑖that proposes a concrete
pathway for interdisciplinary integration.
Kargupta et al.
Ranking Interdisciplinary Potential. Because multiple idea
fragments F = {𝑓𝑖} may be generated for a given research problem
𝑝(from different 𝑞𝑖and D𝑠, we introduce the notion of interdis-
ciplinary potential to prioritize fragments that are most likely to
yield impactful cross-domain advances. Interdisciplinary potential
reflects a fragment’s expected value along dimensions such as depth
of integration, degree of multi-stage disciplinary engagement, inno-
vation payoff, and balance between novelty and feasibility [31, 32].
Rather than assigning absolute scores, we conduct pairwise com-
parisons between idea fragments. Given two fragments 𝑓𝑎, 𝑓𝑏∈F ,
we assess which fragment exhibits stronger interdisciplinary po-
tential based on the above criteria. Aggregating preferences across
all pairwise comparisons yields a ranked ordering of F , from
strongest to weakest interdisciplinary potential. This relative eval-
uation avoids the need for a single scalar metric, while still priori-
tizing the most promising integrated ideas. By structuring interdis-
ciplinary exploration through a metacognition-driven framework,
Idea-Catalyst supports early-stage research ideation while pre-
serving both novelty and rigor.
4
Experimental Design
We choose Qwen3-14B [46] as our primary model for experiments
(no-thinking for efficiency, temperature = 0.7), and gpt-oss-120b
(temperature = 0.0) [1] for our LLM judge. We retrieve a maximum
of 20 papers per round of retrieval and prune source domains where
the majority (50%) of papers are irrelevant to the research problem.
4.1
Dataset
We evaluate Idea-Catalyst using the CHIMERA dataset [39], a col-
lection of interdisciplinary research papers drawn from arXiv with
annotated inspiration relations between source and target domains.
Each instance links a target-domain contribution (target_text)
to a distinct source-domain inspiration (source_text), making it
well suited for studying cross-domain knowledge transfer and in-
terdisciplinary ideation. We select 400 instances where the source
and target domains belong to different coarse-grained scientific
fields, the annotated relation is inspiration, both domains are explic-
itly specified, and the annotated problem context (which serves as
our input 𝑝) does not leak the source insights. We further prevent
knowledge leakage by restricting retrieval (Section 3.1.2) to papers
published strictly before the arXiv posting year of each instance.
To enable direct comparison between generated idea fragments
and ground-truth interdisciplinary contributions, we pre-process
each sample into a structured representation aligned with our frame-
work’s output format (Appendix A) using Qwen3-14B (no-thinking,
temperature= 0). The model is strictly constrained to extract and
reorganize information already present in the abstract and its an-
notated context, and ignoring any experimental results, thereby
preserving the original interdisciplinary intent while enabling fair,
structure-aligned evaluation. For the human study, we ask each
participant to provide a brief (1–2 sentence) description of a re-
search problem they are currently working on or have worked on
previously, along with the corresponding target domain.
4.2
Baselines
We compare Idea-Catalyst against two baselines that reflect com-
mon LLM-driven approaches to ideation with increasing degrees of
retrieval structure: (a) Free-Form Source Retrieval [49] prompts
the model to directly identify source domains without constraints
on distance to the target domain, retrieve related literature, and syn-
thesize ideas, without explicit target-domain analysis or problem
decomposition; (b) Guided Dual-Retrieval first retrieves represen-
tative target-domain literature and then conditions cross-domain
retrieval (with explicit distance constraints) and ideation on this
context, but does not explicitly identify unresolved conceptual chal-
lenges, construct domain-agnostic abstractions, or strategically
guide source-domain selection. Both effectively serve as retrieve-
then-ideate pipelines without metacognitive control.
Ablations. We evaluate three ablations to assess the contribu-
tion of individual components of Idea-Catalyst: × Decomposition,
which removes explicit problem decomposition and target-domain
retrieval; × Interdisciplinary Ranking, which replaces the potential-
based ranking with the proportion of relevant source papers; and
+ Conceptual Rewriting, which rewrites final outputs for further
clarity without altering technical content or structure. Together,
these ablations isolate the effects of structured target-domain anal-
ysis, comparative interdisciplinary potential-based ranking, and
articulation quality. We include further details in Appendix B.
4.3
Evaluation Metrics
Although evaluation for creative ideation in scientific discovery
is inherently subjective and requires high levels of domain exper-
tise [35], LLMs have shown strong capabilities in evaluating along
various dimensions, while aligning with human judgements and
capturing nuanced feedback signals [26–29]. In particular, LLM
judges have proven effective in evaluating creativity, demonstrat-
ing alignment with human judgments across diverse creativity
dimensions and research ideation tasks [16, 36, 48].
We follow established practices in preference-based evaluation
[6, 50] and conduct a comparative evaluation against the ground
truth. For each sample, we present both the generated output and
the ground truth to an LLM judge, which determines which output
better satisfies the evaluation criteria. We report the overall win rate
against the ground truth across all samples, where a win indicates
that the generated output is preferred over the ground truth.
We evaluate each sample along two dimensions:
(1) Takeaways. We assess the quality of source-domain in-
sights extracted by our approach. Specifically, we evaluate take-
aways based on (1) interdisciplinary insightfulness, which measures
whether the takeaways introduce specific, non-obvious concepts
or frameworks from the source domain that are intellectually inter-
esting to researchers in the target domain, and (2) interdisciplinary
relevance, which assesses whether the takeaways have strong po-
tential to inspire new approaches or address gaps in the target
domain.
(2) Idea. We assess the quality of the final generated idea that
integrates interdisciplinary source-domain insights for the target
Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
Table 4: Takeaway-level average win rates at top-𝑘(𝑘∈{1, 2, 3}). Bold indicates best; † denotes second-highest.
Method
Insightfulness
Relevance
Overall
@1
@2
@3
@1
@2
@3
@1
@2
@3
Free-Form Source
18.25
23.06
27.35
47.75
51.45
51.57
44.25
48.06
50.14
Guided Dual
73.00
74.19
72.36
62.25
59.68
60.54
66.75
63.23
64.39
Idea-Catalyst
85.50
85.16
84.47†
60.25
62.42
61.25
63.75
66.45†
65.67
× Decompose
84.00†
84.88†
83.80
60.75†
61.63
65.32
65.25†
66.82
70.13
× Potential Ranking
84.71
84.28
84.83
59.40
59.97
61.13
64.16
64.18
65.03
+ Conceptual Rewriting
82.00
83.71
83.19
59.75
61.94†
62.82†
66.25
67.10
66.95†
Table 5: Idea-level average win rates at top-𝑘(𝑘∈{1, 2, 3}). Bold indicates best; † denotes second-highest.
Method
Novelty
Usefulness
Overall
@1
@2
@3
@1
@2
@3
@1
@2
@3
Free-Form Source
13.50
17.26
19.80
35.50
39.84
40.31
30.50
34.52
35.19
Guided Dual
68.00
70.32
67.95
70.25
65.48†
64.39
72.25
68.39
66.10
Idea-Catalyst
83.25
84.03
83.05
65.75†
66.13
66.38
71.25†
70.65
70.09
× Decompose
82.00†
81.94
78.48
61.00
63.43
65.06†
63.75
65.91
67.85†
× Potential Ranking
83.21†
83.31†
81.79†
62.41
65.15†
64.16
68.17
69.04†
67.92
+ Conceptual Rewriting
82.00
82.90
80.91
62.75
62.90
61.54
66.75
66.29
64.96
Table 6: Qualitative Comparison of Source-Domain Takeaways. Exact outputs taken from Guided Dual and Idea-Catalyst.
Method
Source Domain Framing
Applicability to Target Domain
Guided Dual
Theory of Mind (ToM) and its role in predicting others’
mental states
By equipping AI with ToM capabilities, the system can better understand and predict user intentions,
leading to more natural and effective collaboration. This reduces cognitive load by aligning AI
behaviors with user expectations and improving task efficiency.
Idea-
Catalyst
Reciprocal information flow and role distribution en-
hance joint action coordination by allowing individu-
als to dynamically assign and shift roles based on task
demands and the predictability of others’ actions.
When individuals engage in reciprocal information flow, they can dynamically assign roles (e.g.,
leader–follower) and adjust their strategies in real time based on the actions and predictability of their
partner. This enables them to adapt to complex and undefined tasks without predefined boundaries.
domain. Each idea is evaluated based on (1) interdisciplinary nov-
elty, which measures whether the novelty of the idea, and (2) in-
terdisciplinary usefulness, which measures which idea has greater
potential for addressing the research problem in the target domain.
The complete evaluation prompts are provided in Appendix E.
This evaluation approach allows us to assess the practical utility
of Idea-Catalyst for supporting early-stage research ideation and
provides a methodology that can be adopted for evaluating creativ-
ity in idea generation in future work.
5
Experimental Results
Overall Performance & Analysis. Across both evaluation lev-
els, Idea-Catalyst consistently outperforms baseline approaches
on dimensions associated with exploratory and creative ideation.
At the takeaway level (Table 4), it achieves the highest insightful-
ness scores across all top-𝑘settings, corresponding to an average
relative improvement of 16.22% over Guided Dual and 282.21%
over Free-Form Source when averaged across 𝑘∈{1, 2, 3}. Similarly,
at the idea level (Table 5), Idea-Catalyst attains the strongest
novelty scores, yielding an average relative gain of 21.38% over
Guided Dual and 407.65% over Free-Form Source. This suggests
that metacognition-driven ideation–strategically guided creative
exploration grounded in target-domain critical reasoning–enables
the model to surface ideas and takeaways that are more novel and
insightful than purely retrieval-based baselines. We also observe a
trade-off between exploratory creativity and grounded problem ap-
plicability: the interdisciplinary potential-based ranking generally
favors novelty and insightfulness, with relevance and usefulness
increasing as 𝑘grows. When these criteria conflict, the overall
LLM-judged score tends to prioritize relevance and usefulness, ex-
plaining why baselines can remain competitive on overall metrics
despite substantially lower novelty or insightfulness.
Ablation Studies. Ablation results further highlight the con-
tribution of each component in Idea-Catalyst. Removing target-
domain decomposition leads to reduced novelty and insightfulness,
likely because the model lacks a structured understanding of un-
resolved conceptual gaps and defaults to more surface-level ideas.
Replacing interdisciplinary potential-based ranking with relevance-
based heuristics similarly lowers overall performance, emphasizing
the importance of pairwise comparative evaluation for identifying
Kargupta et al.
high-impact interdisciplinary ideas as opposed to an isolated rel-
evance metric. Finally, while Conceptual Rewriting does not yield
quantitative gains, it improves clarity and interpretability; quali-
tative analysis and human studies indicate that outputs are often
verbose and struggle to concisely communicate cross-domain in-
sights while preserving essential technical content.
1
10
100
1000
Chemistry
Geology
Philosophy
Materials Science
Medicine
Economics
Education
Sociology
Environmental Science
Mathematics
Linguistics
Physics
Engineering
Biology
Psychology
Computer Science
Distribution of Source Domains
Idea-Catalyst
Guided Dual
Free-Form
Figure 3: Source-domain distributions (log-scale) for each
method’s top three ideas.
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence
Cognitive Science
Cognitive Science
Cognitive Science
Cognitive Science
Cognitive Science
Computation and Language
Computation and Language
Computation and Language
Computation and Language
Computation and Language
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Image and Video Processing
Image and Video Processing
Image and Video Processing
Image and Video Processing
Image and Video Processing
Machine Learning
Machine Learning
Machine Learning
Machine Learning
Machine Learning
Neural and Evolutionary Computing
Neural and Evolutionary Computing
Neural and Evolutionary Computing
Neural and Evolutionary Computing
Neural and Evolutionary Computing
Robotics
Robotics
Robotics
Robotics
Robotics
Biology
Biology
Biology
Biology
Biology
Computer Science
Computer Science
Computer Science
Computer Science
Computer Science
Education
Education
Education
Education
Education
Engineering
Engineering
Engineering
Engineering
Engineering
Geology
Geology
Geology
Geology
Geology
Linguistics
Linguistics
Linguistics
Linguistics
Linguistics
Physics
Physics
Physics
Physics
Physics
Psychology
Psychology
Psychology
Psychology
Psychology
Sociology
Sociology
Sociology
Sociology
Sociology
Target Subfield → Source Domain Inspiration Flow
Figure 4: Target-source flow of interdisciplinary inspiration.
5.1
Source Domain Distribution Analysis
We analyze the distribution of source domains selected by each
method by aggregating the top-3 ideas per problem and filtering out
domains with fewer than 10 occurrences (Figure 3). The Free-Form
Source Retrieval baseline exhibits a severe skew toward Computer
Science (947 occurrences), resulting in very low domain diversity
(normalized entropy 𝐻norm = 0.326), indicating that unconstrained
LLM-driven ideation tends to remain within the target domain’s
immediate conceptual neighborhood even when encouraged to ex-
plore externally. In contrast, Guided Dual-Retrieval achieves the
highest overall spread across domains such as Psychology, Engi-
neering, Mathematics, Linguistics, and Physics (𝐻norm = 0.812),
although it also favors closer domains, such as Computer Science
and Engineering (19.67% of its source domains vs. Idea-Catalyst’s
10.75%). Idea-Catalyst exhibits broad cross-domain exploration
spanning Psychology, Biology, Physics, Linguistics, Engineering,
and additional scientific fields (𝐻norm = 0.682), while consistently
achieving competitive or higher relevance/usefulness alongside
substantially stronger novelty/insightfulness (Table 4 & 5). Over-
all, this suggests that effective interdisciplinary ideation depends
not only on increasing domain diversity, but on critically selecting
source domains which yield meaningful conceptual insights.
Target–Source Flow of Inspiration. Figure 4 visualizes the flow
of interdisciplinary inspiration between target subfields and source
domains, restricted to target–source pairs occurring at least 10 times
(top-10 sources per target) to highlight stable patterns. Psychology
emerges as the most prevalent source across many AI-related tar-
gets, reflecting its foundational role in cognition, decision-making,
and human–AI interaction. We also observe intuitive alignments,
such as Neural and Evolutionary Computing drawing from Biol-
ogy, and Artificial Intelligence sourcing from both Psychology and
Linguistics. Overall, the diagram shows that Idea-Catalyst sur-
faces diverse yet intuitive cross-domain influences, with different
Computer Science subfields drawing from complementary external
disciplines rather than a single dominant source.
5.2
Qualitative Comparison of Takeaways
Table 6 presents a qualitative comparison of the top-ranked source-
domain takeaways selected by Guided Dual and Idea-Catalyst
for the problem of human–AI collaboration in open-ended tasks.
While both methods identify Psychology as the most relevant source
domain, the nature of the extracted takeaways differs substantially.
Guided Dual selects a broadly applicable Theory of Mind formu-
lation that reflects well-established, high-level psychological con-
cepts, but remains relatively generic and loosely tied to the specific
challenges of open-ended, co-creative collaboration. In contrast,
Idea-Catalyst surfaces a more targeted and problem-aligned take-
away centered on reciprocal information flow and dynamic role
distribution, directly addressing coordination, role adaptation, and
learning dynamics central to the research problem. This contrast
suggests that beyond identifying relevant source domains, Idea-
Catalyst’s metacognitive guidance enables more precise extraction
of interdisciplinary insights meaningful for the target domain.
5.3
Human Study
We conducted a human study with six PhD researchers working
in Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, and Electri-
cal Engineering, each of whom provided a real research problem
drawn from their own work (participant details and evaluation
interface details shown in Appendix D). Overall, participants found
Idea-Catalyst to be a useful ideation aid, particularly in identify-
ing meaningful research questions and surfacing interdisciplinary
perspectives. On average, researchers rated the relevance of the gen-
erated research questions highly (4.00/5), indicating that the system
effectively captured core challenges in their problem formulations.
Retrieved papers were also rated favorably (3.50/5), suggesting that
Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
retrieval was generally aligned with the researchers’ interests and
problem context.
At the level of source-domain reasoning, takeaways were rated
as moderately relevant (3.13/5) and insightful (3.16/5), with espe-
cially positive feedback from researchers working on problems that
are naturally interdisciplinary (e.g., persuasion susceptibility of
LLMs). Several participants reported that the takeaways introduced
concepts they were motivated to further explore independently.
Interpretability received an intermediate score (2.78/5), indicating
that rationales were generally clear or mostly clear, with only minor
ambiguity on average. Despite this, post-study interviews revealed
that participants still perceived the takeaways and ideas as verbose,
even after one round of conceptual rewriting. This highlights a
central challenge in interdisciplinary ideation: balancing accessi-
bility and brevity with the need to preserve critical technical and
conceptual detail when translating ideas across domains. Future
work could explore personalization strategies that adapt the level
of abstraction and explanation to a user’s background and target
domain.
Finally, participants rated generated ideas as more novel (3.22/5)
than useful (3.00/5), echoing prior findings in [35], namely that
creative research ideas do not always translate directly into immedi-
ately actionable solutions. Taken together, these results suggest that
Idea-Catalyst is effective at supporting early-stage exploratory
thinking and conceptual reframing, while also revealing opportuni-
ties to further improve conciseness, grounding, and user-adaptive
explanation in future iterations.
6
Conclusion
In this work, we introduced Idea-Catalyst, a metacognition-driven
framework for interdisciplinary research ideation that supports tar-
geted, creative exploration across scientific domains. By explicitly
analyzing target-domain challenges and strategically guiding cross-
domain inspiration, Idea-Catalyst surfaces ideas and insights
that are significantly more novel and insightful than existing base-
lines, while remaining grounded in the original research problem.
Our results suggest that supporting the process of interdisciplinary
ideation is a promising direction for human–AI collaboration in
scientific research. Future work includes developing personalized
summarization strategies tailored to researchers’ backgrounds, as
well as leveraging interdisciplinary signals to recommend potential
collaborators across domains.
References
[1] Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum,
Edwin Arbus, Rahul K Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, et al. 2025.
gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10925 (2025).
[2] Mousumi Bose, Judith Anne Garretson Folse, and Sooyeon Nikki Lee-Wingate.
2013. Enhancing the influence of distal primes on creativity: the role of contextual
and personal variables. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice 21, 4 (2013),
351–370.
[3] Sofía Castro, Marcin Bukowski, Juan Lupiáñez, and Zofia Wodniecka. 2021. Fast
or accurate? The change of goals modulates the efficiency of executive control.
Polish Psychological Bulletin 52, 1 (2021), 49–66.
[4] Ed Catmull and Amy Wallace. 2023. Creativity, Inc.(The Expanded Edition):
Overcoming the unseen forces that stand in the way of true inspiration. Random
House.
[5] Pier-Luc de Chantal and Henry Markovits. 2022. Reasoning outside the box:
Divergent thinking is related to logical reasoning. Cognition 224 (2022), 105064.
[6] Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. 2024.
Length-controlled alpacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.04475 (2024).
[7] Christopher P Dwyer, Deaglán Campbell, and Niall Seery. 2025. An Evaluation
of the Relationship Between Critical Thinking and Creative Thinking: Comple-
mentary Metacognitive Processes or Strange Bedfellows? Journal of Intelligence
13, 2 (2025), 23.
[8] John H Flavell. 1979. Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of
cognitive–developmental inquiry. American psychologist 34, 10 (1979), 906.
[9] Shashwat Goel, Rishi Hazra, Dulhan Jayalath, Timon Willi, Parag Jain, William F
Shen, Ilias Leontiadis, Francesco Barbieri, Yoram Bachrach, Jonas Geiping,
et al. 2025. Training AI Co-Scientists Using Rubric Rewards. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.23707 (2025).
[10] Milene Gonçalves and Philip Cash. 2021. The life cycle of creative ideas: Towards
a dual-process theory of ideation. Design Studies 72 (2021), 100988.
[11] Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar
Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno,
et al. 2025. Towards an AI co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864 (2025).
[12] Ivan Grahek, Xiamin Leng, S Musslick, and A Shenhav. 2023. The cost of adjusting
cognitive control: A dynamical systems approach. In Conference on Cognitive
Computational Neuroscience.
[13] Sikun Guo, Amir Hassan Shariatmadari, Guangzhi Xiong, Albert Huang, Myles
Kim, Corey M Williams, Stefan Bekiranov, and Aidong Zhang. 2025. Ideabench:
Benchmarking large language models for research idea generation. In Proceedings
of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V.
2. 5888–5899.
[14] Tarun Gupta and Danish Pruthi. 2025. All that glitters is not novel: Plagiarism
in ai generated research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16487 (2025).
[15] Diane F Halpern. 2007. The nature and nurture of critical thinking. Critical
thinking in psychology 1 (2007), 1–14.
[16] Zhaoyi Joey Hou, Bowei Alvin Zhang, Yining Lu, Bhiman Kumar Baghel, An-
neliese Brei, Ximing Lu, Meng Jiang, Faeze Brahman, Snigdha Chaturvedi, Haw-
Shiuan Chang, et al. 2025. CreativityPrism: A Holistic Benchmark for Large
Language Model Creativity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20091 (2025).
[17] Jin Huang, Silviu Cucerzan, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, and Ryen W White.
2025. Idea2Plan: Exploring AI-Powered Research Planning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.24891 (2025).
[18] Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Marissa Radensky, Pao Siangliulue, Tom Hope, Bha-
vana Dalvi, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Daniel S Weld, and Peter Clark. 2025.
Codescientist: End-to-end semi-automated scientific discovery with code-based
experimentation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL 2025. 13370–13467.
[19] Philip N Johnson-Laird. 2010. Mental models and human reasoning. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 43 (2010), 18243–18250.
[20] Priyanka Kargupta, Ishika Agarwal, Tal August, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Tree-
of-Debate: Multi-Persona Debate Trees Elicit Critical Thinking for Scientific
Comparative Analysis. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Wanxiang Che, Joyce
Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association
for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 29378–29403. doi:10.18653/v1/
2025.acl-long.1422
[21] Priyanka Kargupta, Shuyue Stella Li, Haocheng Wang, Jinu Lee, Shan Chen,
Orevaoghene Ahia, Dean Light, Thomas L Griffiths, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Jiawei
Han, et al. 2025. Cognitive foundations for reasoning and their manifestation in
llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16660 (2025).
[22] Priyanka Kargupta, Runchu Tian, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Beyond True or False:
Retrieval-Augmented Hierarchical Analysis of Nuanced Claims. In Proceedings of
the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Moham-
mad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna,
Austria, 29664–29679. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1434
[23] Priyanka Kargupta, Nan Zhang, Yunyi Zhang, Rui Zhang, Prasenjit Mitra, and
Jiawei Han. 2025. TaxoAdapt: Aligning LLM-Based Multidimensional Taxonomy
Construction to Evolving Research Corpora. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pile-
hvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 29834–
29850. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1442
[24] Rodney Michael Kinney, Chloe Anastasiades, Russell Authur, Iz Beltagy, Jonathan
Bragg, Alexandra Buraczynski, Isabel Cachola, Stefan Candra, Yoganand Chan-
drasekhar, Arman Cohan, Miles Crawford, Doug Downey, Jason Dunkelberger,
Oren Etzioni, Rob Evans, Sergey Feldman, Joseph Gorney, David W. Graham, F.Q.
Hu, Regan Huff, Daniel King, Sebastian Kohlmeier, Bailey Kuehl, Michael Lan-
gan, Daniel Lin, Haokun Liu, Kyle Lo, Jaron Lochner, Kelsey MacMillan, Tyler C.
Murray, Christopher Newell, Smita Rao, Shaurya Rohatgi, Paul Sayre, Shan-
non Zejiang Shen, Amanpreet Singh, Luca Soldaini, Shivashankar Subramanian,
A. Tanaka, Alex D Wade, Linda M. Wagner, Lucy Lu Wang, Christopher Wil-
helm, Caroline Wu, Jiangjiang Yang, Angele Zamarron, Madeleine van Zuylen,
and Daniel S. Weld. 2023. The Semantic Scholar Open Data Platform. ArXiv
abs/2301.10140 (2023). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256194545
Kargupta et al.
[25] Karen Strohm Kitchner. 1983. Cognition, metacognition, and epistemic cognition:
A three-level model of cognitive processing. Human development 26, 4 (1983),
222–232.
[26] Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Ren Lu, Thomas Mes-
nard, Johan Ferret, Colton Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, and Abhinav
Rastogi. 2023. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
ai feedback. International Conference on Learning Representations (2023).
[27] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah
Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al.
2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 46534–46594.
[28] Shuhaib Mehri, Xiusi Chen, Heng Ji, and Dilek Hakkani-Tür. 2025. Beyond
Sample-Level Feedback: Using Reference-Level Feedback to Guide Data Synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04511 (2025).
[29] Shuhaib Mehri and Vered Shwartz. 2023. Automatic evaluation of generative
models with instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20072 (2023).
[30] Ciarán O’Driscoll, Aneesha Singh, Iya Chichua, Joachim Clodic, Anjali Desai,
Dara Nikolova, Alex Jie Yap, Irene Zhou, and Stephen Pilling. 2024. An Ecological
Mobile Momentary Intervention to Support Dynamic Goal Pursuit: Feasibility
and Acceptability Study. JMIR Formative Research 8 (2024), e49857.
[31] Keisuke Okamura. 2019. Interdisciplinarity revisited: evidence for research
impact and dynamism. Palgrave Communications 5, 1 (2019).
[32] Alan Porter and Ismael Rafols. 2009. Is science becoming more interdisciplinary?
Measuring and mapping six research fields over time. scientometrics 81, 3 (2009),
719–745.
[33] Kevin Pu, KJ Kevin Feng, Tovi Grossman, Tom Hope, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra,
Matt Latzke, Jonathan Bragg, Joseph Chee Chang, and Pao Siangliulue. 2025.
Ideasynth: Iterative research idea development through evolving and composing
idea facets with literature-grounded feedback. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–31.
[34] Christina Raasch, Viktor Lee, Sebastian Spaeth, and Cornelius Herstatt. 2013. The
rise and fall of interdisciplinary research: The case of open source innovation.
Research policy 42, 5 (2013), 1138–1151.
[35] Chenglei Si, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Diyi Yang. 2025. The Ideation-Execution
Gap: Execution Outcomes of LLM-Generated versus Human Research Ideas.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20803 (2025).
[36] Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2024. Can llms generate novel
research ideas? a large-scale human study with 100+ nlp researchers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.04109 (2024).
[37] Chenglei Si, Zitong Yang, Yejin Choi, Emmanuel Candès, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori
Hashimoto. 2026. Towards Execution-Grounded Automated AI Research. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.14525 (2026).
[38] Ricardo Sosa. 2019. Accretion theory of ideation: Evaluation regimes for ideation
stages. Design Science 5 (2019), e23.
[39] Noy Sternlicht and Tom Hope. 2025. CHIMERA: A Knowledge Base of Idea
Recombination in Scientific Literature. arXiv:2505.20779 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.
org/abs/2505.20779
[40] Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. 1998. Reinforcement learning: An
introduction. Vol. 1. MIT press Cambridge.
[41] Marek Urban and Kamila Urban. 2025. Do we need metacognition for creativ-
ity? A necessary condition analysis of creative metacognition. Psychology of
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts 19, 6 (2025), 1467.
[42] Richard Van Noorden. 2015. Interdisciplinary research by the numbers. Nature
525, 7569 (2015), 306–307.
[43] Qingyun Wang, Doug Downey, Heng Ji, and Tom Hope. 2024. Scimon: Scientific
inspiration machines optimized for novelty. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
279–299.
[44] Solange Muglia Wechsler, Carlos Saiz, Silvia F Rivas, Claudete Maria Medeiros
Vendramini, Leandro S Almeida, Maria Celia Mundim, and Amanda Franco.
2018. Creative and critical thinking: Independent or overlapping components?
Thinking skills and creativity 27 (2018), 114–122.
[45] Itai Yanai and Martin Lercher. 2019. Night science. Genome Biology 20, 1 (2019),
179.
[46] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng,
Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025. Qwen3 technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025).
[47] Nick Yeung and Christopher Summerfield. 2012.
Metacognition in human
decision-making: confidence and error monitoring. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 367, 1594 (May 2012), 1310–1321.
[48] Yunpu Zhao, Rui Zhang, Wenyi Li, and Ling Li. 2025. Assessing and under-
standing creativity in large language models. Machine Intelligence Research 22, 3
(2025), 417–436.
[49] Chengbo Zheng, Yuanhao Zhang, Zeyu Huang, Chuhan Shi, Minrui Xu, and
Xiaojuan Ma. 2024. DiscipLink: unfolding interdisciplinary information seeking
process via human-AI co-exploration. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–20.
[50] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu,
Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2023. Judging
llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information
processing systems 36 (2023), 46595–46623.
A
Idea Fragment Output Format
We represent each idea as an idea fragment with the following
schema:
Idea Fragment Format
"idea_fragment": {
"title": "Brief, descriptive title (max 15 words)",
"core_insight": "2–3 sentence summary of the integration",
"integration_mechanism": {
"target_domain_elements": [
"Target-domain concept or method",
"Another target-domain concept or method"
],
"selected_takeaways": [
{
"takeaway_id": "t1",
"source_domain_formulation":
"Conceptual insight using source-domain framing",
"mechanism_explanation":
"Explanation of the underlying conceptual logic",
"selection_rationale":
"Why this takeaway is relevant for integration"
}
],
"synthesis_approach":
"Description of how elements are combined"
},
"challenge_resolution": {
"addresses_target_challenge":
"How the integration addresses the challenge",
"addresses_source_limitations":
"How integration mitigates limitations of the insight",
"addresses_research_problem":
"How this contributes to the overall research problem"
},
"concrete_realization": {
"proposed_approach":
"Specific algorithm, or technical realization",
"key_innovations": [
"Novel aspect enabled by integration",
"Additional emergent innovation"
]
}
}
}
B
Baselines
We compare Idea-Catalyst against two baseline methods that re-
flect common LLM-driven approaches to interdisciplinary ideation
with increasing degrees of retrieval structure:
• Free-Form Source Retrieval [49] prompts the model to
directly identify potentially relevant source domains (with
no restriction on distance to the target domain) for a given
research problem, generate search queries, retrieve papers
from those domains, and synthesize research ideas, without
explicit analysis of the target domain or decomposition
of the problem. This baseline captures an intuition-driven
approach that relies primarily on the model’s parametric
knowledge of the target domain rather than systematic
reasoning about research gaps.
• Guided Dual-Retrieval introduces additional structure
by first retrieving representative literature from the target
Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
domain, then conditioning cross-domain exploration and
ideation on this retrieved context. While this baseline in-
corporates retrieval from both target and source domains,
it does not explicitly identify unresolved conceptual chal-
lenges, construct domain-agnostic abstractions, or strate-
gically guide source-domain selection, effectively serving
as a retrieve-then-ideate pipeline without metacognitive
control.
Ablations. We conduct the following ablation studies to isolate
the contributions of key components of Idea-Catalyst:
• No Decomposition removes the target-domain decompo-
sition stage, relying instead on the model’s parametric
knowledge to assess which aspects of the research problem
have been addressed and which challenges remain, without
explicitly decomposing the problem into research ques-
tions or retrieving target-domain literature conditioned on
them. This evaluates the importance of structured, retrieval-
grounded self- and context-awareness for identifying mean-
ingful research gaps.
• No Interdisciplinary Ranking removes the interdisci-
plinary potential-based ranking stage, replacing pairwise
LLM-based comparisons with a heuristic ranking based
solely on the proportion of retrieved source-domain papers
deemed relevant to the target challenge. This tests whether
explicit comparative evaluation is necessary to surface high-
impact interdisciplinary ideas beyond relevance alone.
• Conceptual Rewriting retains the full pipeline but re-
places the final idea fragment with a rewritten version that
improves conceptual clarity and accessibility while preserv-
ing structure, technical content, and domain grounding.
This assesses whether observed gains stem from deeper
interdisciplinary integration rather than improved articula-
tion or presentation.
C
Domains Supported by Semantic Scholar for
Retrieval
Our literature retrieval pipeline relies on the Semantic Scholar
Snippets API, which supports search queries over a fixed set of
coarse-grained scientific domains. Specifically, Semantic Scholar in-
dexes papers under the following fields of study: Computer Science,
Medicine, Chemistry, Biology, Materials Science, Physics, Geology,
Psychology, Art, History, Geography, Sociology, Business, Political
Science, Economics, Philosophy, Mathematics, Engineering, Environ-
mental Science, Agricultural and Food Sciences, Education, Law, and
Linguistics.
To ensure compatibility with this constraint, all fine-grained
target-domain subfields provided as input to Idea-Catalyst (e.g.,
Natural Language Processing, Reinforcement Learning, Cognitive
Science) are mapped to their corresponding coarse-grained Seman-
tic Scholar domains (e.g., Computer Science, Psychology) prior to
retrieval. This mapping is used solely for literature retrieval and
filtering and does not affect the conceptual formulation of research
questions, domain-agnostic abstractions, or subsequent interdisci-
plinary reasoning stages.
D
Human Study Details & Participant
Backgrounds
We conducted a human study with six PhD researchers working
in Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, and Electri-
cal Engineering, each of whom provided a real research problem
drawn from their own work (as shown in Table 7). We note that
the study was declared exempt after being reviewed by our Institu-
tional Review Board (IRB). We provide screenshots of our evaluation
interface in Figures 5, 6, and 7.
E
Evaluation Prompts
Takeaway Evaluation Prompt
You are an expert evaluator assessing the quality of
cross-domain research takeaways.
↩→
Your task is to compare takeaways from two different methods
that attempt to address the
↩→
same research problem by drawing insights from domains outside
the target domain.
↩→
--------------------------------------------------
RESEARCH PROBLEM
{research_problem}
TARGET DOMAIN
{target_domain}
--------------------------------------------------
METHOD 1 TAKEAWAYS
{method_1_text}
--------------------------------------------------
METHOD 2 TAKEAWAYS
{method_2_text}
--------------------------------------------------
EVALUATION CRITERIA
When evaluating Method 1 and Method 2, explicitly ground your
judgment in the relevant
↩→
fields of each takeaway, as described below.
### 1. INTERDISCIPLINARY INSIGHTFULNESS
Assess whether the method's takeaways provide insightful
perspectives on the research
↩→
problem.
- Perspectives should introduce specific concepts/frameworks
from their respective
↩→
source domain
- Insightful perspectives should be intellectually
interesting, non-
obvious, and
↩→
thought-provoking to researchers in the target domain
({target_domain})
↩→
- Non-obvious perspectives typically come from source
domains that are meaningfully
↩→
distinct from the target domain ({target_domain})
### 2. INTERDISCIPLINARY RELEVANCE
Assess whether the method's takeaways are relevant to the
research problem and have
↩→
strong potential for integration in the target domain
({target_domain}).
↩→
- Ideal takeaways should:
- Inspire new approaches/solutions to the research problem
in the target domain
↩→
({target_domain})
- Address a gap/challenge for the research problem in the
target domain
↩→
({target_domain})
Kargupta et al.
Figure 5: Screenshot of evaluation interface (reviewing questions/challenges).
Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
Figure 6: Screenshot of evaluation interface (reviewing takeaways).
Kargupta et al.
Figure 7: Screenshot of evaluation interface (reviewing ideas).
Sparking Scientific Creativity via
LLM-Driven Interdisciplinary Inspiration
Table 7: Participant backgrounds and research problems used in the human study. All participants are PhD researchers ranging
from 3 to 5 years of research experience.
Primary Research Area
Target Domain
Research Problem Description
Natural Language Processing
Multilingual NLP
Are there tasks where LLM performance varies systematically across lan-
guages, particularly for culture-specific queries, and how can such perfor-
mance disparities be mitigated?
Electrical Engineering
In-Memory Computing
How can the accuracy of in-memory computing systems be improved while
preserving high energy efficiency, especially for Edge-AI applications?
Natural Language Processing
Multilingual Semantics
Why do language models change their answers across languages for the
same query, even in high-resource settings, and does this reflect knowledge
or semantic misalignment?
Natural Language Processing
Persuasion and Safety
How can we characterize and mitigate the susceptibility of LLMs to persua-
sion, including harmful or adversarial influence, while preserving beneficial
adaptability?
Machine Learning
Model Interpretability
How can influence functions be made dynamic, such that the importance of
data points adapts across models and training contexts rather than remaining
static?
Natural Language Processing
User Simulation
How can LLM-based user simulators better maintain consistent personas,
reflect diverse user behaviors, and be evaluated for realism in multi-turn
interactions?
- The complexity, simplicity, or practicality of the takeaway
should not factor into
↩→
your decision (e.g., a "clear, immediately applicable"
solution does not mean more
↩→
relevant). Relevance is defined based on the potential impact
of the source domain
↩→
being introduced to the target domain for the research
problem.
↩→
- Keep in mind that if the distance between the source and
target domain is larger
↩→
(e.g., Computer Science & Engineering are closer than
Computer Science & Philosophy),
↩→
the idea may inherently be less practical. This does not mean
that it is less relevant.
↩→
Focus on the degree of the potential impact to the research
problem instead.
↩→
IGNORE:
- Length of explanations
- Narrative polish
- Missing implementation details
CONSIDER:
- **Consistency**: Are the method’s takeaways consistently
meaningful, or uneven?
- **Groundedness**: Are claims supported by real conceptual
alignment?
- **Scope appropriateness**: Are takeaways neither trivial
nor wildly speculative?
--------------------------------------------------
OUTPUT FORMAT
Return a JSON object:
{{
"takeaway_comparison": {{
"interdisciplinary_insightfulness": {{
"preferred_method": 1 | 2,
"reasoning": "1-2 sentences explaining your reasoning for
the preferred method"
↩→
}},
"interdisciplinary_relevance": {{
"preferred_method": 1 | 2,
"reasoning": "1-2 sentences explaining your reasoning for
the preferred method based
↩→
on the evaluation criteria"
}},
}},
"overall_assessment": {{
"preferred_method": 1 | 2,
"summary": "2-3 sentences explaining which method's
takeaways are higher quality in
↩→
terms of interdisciplinary insightfulness and
interdisciplinary relevance"
↩→
}}
}}
Idea Evaluation Prompt
You are an expert evaluator assessing the quality of
cross-domain RESEARCH IDEAS.
↩→
Your task is to compare two proposed ideas that integrate
insights from an external domain
↩→
to address the same research problem.
--------------------------------------------------
RESEARCH PROBLEM
{research_problem}
TARGET DOMAIN
{target_domain}
--------------------------------------------------
METHOD 1 IDEA
Source Domain:
{method_1_idea.get("source_domain", "N/A")}
Proposed Approach:
{method_1_idea.get("idea", {}).get("proposed_approach", "N/A")}
Key Innovations:
{method_1_idea.get("idea", {}).get("key_innovations", [])}
Supporting Takeaways:
Kargupta et al.
{method_1_text}
--------------------------------------------------
METHOD 2 IDEA
Source Domain:
{method_2_idea.get("source_domain", "N/A")}
Proposed Approach:
{method_2_idea.get("idea", {}).get("proposed_approach", "N/A")}
Key Innovations:
{method_2_idea.get("idea", {}).get("key_innovations", [])}
Supporting Takeaways:
{method_2_text}
--------------------------------------------------
EVALUATION CRITERIA
### 1.INTERDISCIPLINARY NOVELTY
Which idea is more novel?
- The **source domain** chosen and its conceptual distance
from the target domain
↩→
- The **proposed_approach**: Is the idea non-obvious to
target-domain experts?
↩→
- The **key_innovations**: Do they reflect insights unlikely
to arise within the
↩→
target domain alone?
- Whether the supporting takeaways draw on **less common or
underexplored external
↩→
insights**
Higher novelty means:
- The idea is surprising but still credible
- The cross-domain move feels inventive rather than expected
### 2.INTERDISCIPLINARY USEFULNESS
Which idea has greater interdisciplinary potential for
addressing the research problem in
↩→
the target domain ({target_domain})?
- Ideas with greater interdisciplinary potential should:
- Present new approaches/solutions to the research problem
in the target domain
↩→
({target_domain})
- Address a gap/challenge for the research problem in the
target domain
↩→
({target_domain})
- The idea integrates the concepts from both the target
domain and source domain
↩→
into a well-formed idea that addresses the research problem
- The complexity, simplicity, or practicality of the proposed
idea should not factor
↩→
into your decision (e.g., a more "clear, immediately
applicable"/"direct"/"concrete"
↩→
solution does not make it more useful).Usefulness is defined
based on the potential
↩→
impact of the source domain being introduced to the target
domain. Specifically, a more
↩→
useful interdisciplinary idea integrates the source and
target domains in a way that
↩→
allows for a more significant problem/challenge to be solved
or a significant gap in
↩→
existing ideas to be addressed.
- Keep in mind that if the distance between the source and
target domain is larger
↩→
(e.g., Computer Science & Engineering are closer than
Computer Science & Philosophy),
↩→
the idea may inherently be less practical. This does not mean
that it is less useful.
↩→
Focus on the degree of the potential impact instead.
--------------------------------------------------
OUTPUT FORMAT
Return a JSON object:
{{
"idea_comparison": {{
"interdisciplinary_novelty": {{
"preferred_method": 1 | 2,
"reasoning": "1-2 sentences explaining which idea is more
novel"
↩→
}},
"interdisciplinary_usefulness": {{
"preferred_method": 1 | 2,
"reasoning": "1-2 sentences explaining why the preferred
idea is more useful than
↩→
the other idea for the research problem based on the
evaluation criteria"
↩→
}}
}},
"overall_assessment": {{
"preferred_method": 1 | 2,
"summary": "2-3 sentences summarizing which idea is overall
more interdisciplinary
↩→
novel, interdisciplinary useful, and integrates the two
domains better"
↩→
}}
}}
Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009
